Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS) for neuromodulation has become a common treatment. However, the incidence of seizures or epilepsy following chronic DBS is not well understood. This study aims to estimate these complications for movement disorders, pain, and psychiatric conditions through a literature review. The terms seizure, epilepsy, and deep brain stimulation were initially used for the search, but they only revealed papers dealing with DBS's experimental and clinical application for treating chronic seizure disorders. Therefore, a strategy of searching through clinical case series of DBS was employed. Thirty-two papers were reviewed that described the stereotactic placement of DBS electrodes for movement disorders, pain syndromes, and psychiatric conditions with cohorts of n 45. Sixteen of these papers, describing at least 1418 DBS electrode placements in 1254 patients, did not mention seizures as a complication. In contrast, 16 papers described seizures in 42 patients out of at least 2101 electrode placements in 1555 patients, resulting in an incidence of 2.7%. The range of seizure incidence varied widely, from 0% in three series encompassing 317 patients and 576 electrode placements to as high as 10% and 13% in others. The reasons for this variance are unclear. At least 74% of seizures occurred around the time of electrode implantation, often accompanied by intracranial hemorrhage. Follow-up times varied from 6 months to 5 years. The analysis was complicated by potential data duplication from some centers. After adjusting for publication duplicate data, the risk of seizures associated with DBS placement is estimated to be lower than 2.4% (95% CI 1.7 to 3.3%). The risk of post-procedural seizures associated with chronic deep brain stimulation is even lower, with estimates around 0.5% (95% CI .02 to 1.0%).

Deep Brain Stimulation is widely used for various movement disorders and pain conditions, and is being evaluated for certain mood and psychiatric disturbances. The spectrum of procedural and chronic complications associated with DBS includes intracranial hemorrhage, infection, hardware failure, and mood disturbances. Given the procedure involves cortical puncture and traversing subcortical brain tissue, there is an expected risk of seizures and epilepsy as a complication. Interestingly, there is increasing work on using DBS to treat certain refractory epilepsies. This study specifically aimed to determine the risk of periprocedural seizures and epilepsy caused by chronic DBS for common movement disorders and certain chronic pain conditions and obsessive-compulsive disorder. The motivation for this study was twofold: to provide data for the United Kingdom's driving regulations concerning epilepsy following DBS, and due to the occurrence of a delayed chronic seizure disorder in a young patient after DBS implantation for dystonia.

A literature review was conducted using specific search terms related to DBS, seizures, epilepsy, Parkinson’s Disease, essential tremor, dystonia, pain, and complications. This review aimed to ascertain the incidence of seizure disorders, their timing, and their association with other surgical complications, such as intracranial hematoma. Unfortunately, many series either lacked this information or, if present, it was difficult to precisely time the seizures or relate them to periprocedural complications. There was also a significant variation in reported seizure incidences, suggesting that the figures obtained are estimates. Patients can be counseled preoperatively that the seizure risk is relatively low, largely periprocedural, and the likelihood of developing a chronic seizure disorder is extremely low.