A growing body of literature has demonstrated the preventive role of physical activity in depression, and relevant research is rapidly on the rise. The aim of this study was to conduct a bibliometric analysis of the 50 most-cited review papers on physical activity and depression, thus identifying important research topics and future research directions.

Methods: The 50 most-cited review articles were identified and extracted from the Web of Science Core Collection database, and a bibliometric citation analysis was performed using Microsoft Excel and VOSviewer software. Information on the country, authors of publications, publishing journals, citations (i.e., total or annual), keywords, and other meaningful data was analyzed comprehensively.

Results: The 50 most-cited review articles received, on average, 247.5 citations per article. Most review articles were from England, with contributions from some highly cited researchers and research teams. Western countries/regions, such as England, Australia, and the United States were the most influential in publishing review articles on physical activity and depression. The Journal of Affective Disorders and the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews were the journals that published the most highly cited review articles on physical activity and depression. Important research topics on the literature on physical activity and depression focused on different types of physical activity and depression; intervention studies related to physical activity and depression; fitness and physical activity levels in people with depression; methodological analyses in physical activity and depression studies; and the impact of physical activity on depression in different populations.

Conclusion: This study reveals that review studies on physical activity and depression have great potential to develop further knowledge. This study also highlights some future research directions, which can serve to effectively advance the knowledge base.

An individual with depression may experience symptoms such as mood issues, loss of interest or pleasure, a lack of energy, feelings of guilt or low self-esteem, disturbed sleep or appetite, and difficulty concentrating. There is a higher risk of disease associated with depression, which adversely affects human health and well-being. It has been well-documented that depressive symptoms have a detrimental impact on psychological and physical health from infancy through to old age. For example, depression in childhood has a long-lasting negative effect on mental health later in life, and can lead to neurological abnormalities in the aging population. Specifically, the detrimental health outcomes of high levels of depression include diabetes, cardiovascular disease, cancer, and other health problems. Furthermore, depression is an important predictor of cardiac mortality and morbidity, such as cardiac functioning and coronary heart disease. Depression also affects biological factors and, consequently, contributes to physical disability.

The high prevalence of depression has been established in the existing evidence. According to the World Health Organization, the prevalence of depression is increasing globally, and a significant percentage of the world's population was predicted to suffer from depression in recent years. A systematic review synthesized thousands of non-duplicate articles, and an estimated significant percentage pooled prevalence of depression was observed in children, adolescents, and young adults. Further, the weighted mean prevalence of depression was significant in university students, while the prevalence ranged in the aging population. Notably, evidence from a scoping review has shown that a notable percentage of participants suffered from depression during the COVID-19 pandemic. The potential factors leading to the increasing prevalence of depression are mainly due to environmental changes, including high prevalence of obesity, unhealthy diet, insufficient physical activity, and inappropriate light and lack of sleep. To reverse the situation on the large number of patients suffering from depression or a group of people at the risk of developing depression, clinical practice or evidence-based recommendations strongly suggest that doing more physical activity can provide a feasible and effective approach against depression. There has been a great amount of literature examining the relationship between physical activity and depression, especially review studies. This is because review studies can not only summarize in-depth research knowledge but also allow for the determination of future research directions. This type of study design has, thus, become increasingly popular, and more researchers have studied physical activity and depression using reviews. Additionally, considering some unknown research issues in the context of physical activity and depression, more research in this field is required. The use of bibliometric analyses serves as a useful analytical approach to comprehensively summarize the current state of review studies on physical activity and depression.

Bibliometric analysis is centered on the citations of publications; referring to the number of research articles that cite a given published article. The total number of citations not only establishes the academic impact of a specific article in the field but also serves as a basis for determining a journal's impact factor, which can then be used as an indicator for assessing its quality. Across the vast majority of research fields, a research article with more than 100 citations can be considered a high-quality paper. On the basis of citation analyses, many studies have attempted to conduct bibliometric analyses to better understand recent scientific progress and research trends in a particular subject area.

Given that the publications concerning physical activity and depression in the literature are evolving rapidly, the relevant research scope and characteristics are worth studying. Therefore, the main objective of this study was to identify the 50 most-cited review articles focusing on physical activity and depression, using a citation analysis. The second aim of this study was to visualize the most active countries/nations, author groups, and most frequent keywords using VOSviewer software. This kind of analysis can help deepen our understanding of the current state of research on physical activity and depression and is expected to offer novel insights into future research.