The objective was to review and synthesize qualitative research studies that have explored the experiences of patients undergoing deep brain stimulation in advanced Parkinson's disease. This systematic review and meta-synthesis included seven original papers, using metaethnography as the method. The studies were conducted in Denmark, France, and Sweden and involved 116 patients who had undergone deep brain stimulation and 9 spouses of patients.

Before surgery, advancing Parkinson's disease is experienced as a period of considerable loss and a diminishing sense of control. Patients have significant hopes for what deep brain stimulation can offer. Following surgery, many describe a sense of euphoria, although this does not last, and there is a need for significant transitions afterward. The concept of normality is central to the experience of deep brain stimulation, and a sense of control may be a key condition for achieving this new normality. The experiences of both patients and spouses, as well as the transitions they undergo, are influenced by their hopes of what surgery will enable them to achieve or regain, i.e., a new sense of normality.

There is a need for further qualitative research to understand the nature of these transitions to inform how best patients and their spouses can be supported by healthcare professionals before, during, and after deep brain stimulation. In assessing the outcomes of deep brain stimulation and other treatments in advanced Parkinson's disease, it's important to consider how to capture holistic concepts such as normality and control. Studies examining the outcomes of deep brain stimulation require longer-term follow-up.

Deep brain stimulation is widely used to treat a range of symptoms in advanced Parkinson's disease, proving effective in improving many motor and some non-motor symptoms. Despite its overall effectiveness, not all patients report improvements in quality of life, with some studies finding a significant percentage showing no improvement or even a decline in quality of life after surgery.

Most research on the efficacy and use of deep brain stimulation is quantitative. However, qualitative research provides in-depth description, understanding, and explanation of patients' experiences of disease and treatment, which can help to contextualize and understand trial observations. Qualitative synthesis techniques have been developed to analyze the findings of primary qualitative research, identify commonality and difference in findings, and arrive at higher-order interpretations and explanations of the subjective experience of disease and treatment from a patient perspective.

This synthesis aimed to examine whether existing qualitative research on patients' experiences and perspectives related to deep brain stimulation could provide further insight into the variable and often negative assessment of quality of life given by patients and spouses soon after surgery, despite the procedure's apparent overall effectiveness as measured in randomized controlled trials.