1
Vol.:(0123456789) Scientific Reports  |         (2024) 14:6674  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-57252-2
www.nature.com/scientificreportsGait‑related beta‑gamma 
phase amplitude coupling 
in the subthalamic nucleus 
of parkinsonian patients
AmirAli Farokhniaee 1,2*, Chiara Palmisano 3, Jasmin Del Vecchio Del Vecchio 3, 
Gianni Pezzoli 1,2, Jens Volkmann 3 & Ioannis U. Isaias 2,3
Analysis of coupling between the phases and amplitudes of neural oscillations has gained increasing 
attention as an important mechanism for large‑scale brain network dynamics. In Parkinson’s disease 
(PD), preliminary evidence indicates abnormal beta‑phase coupling to gamma‑amplitude in different 
brain areas, including the subthalamic nucleus (STN). We analyzed bilateral STN local field potentials 
(LFPs) in eight subjects with PD chronically implanted with deep brain stimulation electrodes during 
upright quiet standing and unperturbed walking. Phase‑amplitude coupling (PAC) was computed 
using the Kullback ‑Liebler method, based on the modulation index. Neurophysiological recordings 
were correlated with clinical and kinematic measurements and individual molecular brain imaging 
studies  ([123I]FP ‑CIT and single‑photon emission computed tomography). We showed a dopamine‑
related increase in subthalamic beta‑gamma PAC from standing to walking. Patients with poor PAC 
modulation and low PAC during walking spent significantly more time in the stance and double 
support phase of the gait cycle. Our results provide new insights into the subthalamic contribution to 
human gait and suggest cross‑frequency coupling as a gateway mechanism to convey patient ‑specific 
information of motor control for human locomotion.
Keywords  Deep brain stimulation, Gait, Local field potentials, Parkinson’s disease, Phase-amplitude 
coupling, Subthalamic nucleus
Abbreviations
[123I]FP-CIT   [123I]N-ω-fluoropropyl-2β-carbomethoxy-3β-(4-iodophenyl)nortropane
BPND  Non-displaceable binding potential
DAT   Dopamine reuptake transporters
DBS   Deep brain stimulation
EEG   Electroencephalogram
EMG   Electromyography
H-PAC   Total phase-amplitude coupling value for the high beta band
ICA  Independent component analysis
IC  Independent component
L-PAC  Total phase-amplitude coupling value for the low beta band
LFP  Local field potential
MI  Modulation Index
PAC   Phase-amplitude coupling
PD  Parkinson’s disease
S  Standing
PSD   Power spectral density
SPECT  Single-photon computed tomography
STN   Subthalamic nucleus (+  /-, more or less dopaminergic innervation)OPEN
1Fondazione Grigioni Per Il Morbo Di Parkinson, Via Gianfranco Zuretti 35, 20125 Milano, Italy. 2Parkinson 
Institute Milan, ASST G. Pini CTO, Via Bignami 1, 20126 Milano, Italy. 3Department of Neurology, University 
Hospital of Würzburg, and Julius Maximilian University of Würzburg, Josef -Schneider -Straße 11, 97080 Würzburg, 
Germany. *email: farokhniaee@parkinson.it2
Vol:.(1234567890) Scientific Reports  |         (2024) 14:6674  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-57252-2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/UPDRS  Unified Parkinson’s disease rating scale
W  Walking
The supraspinal locomotor network is distributed over multiple brain  areas1–3 and specifically wired neuronal 
 circuits4,5, making its understanding a challenging task. Recent technological advances, particularly new brain 
stimulators capable of recording neural activity in chronically-implanted patients (e.g., AlphaDBS [Newronika], 
Activa PC +  S6,7 and Percept PC [Medtronic  PLC]8) have strongly influenced research on the control of movement 
and enabled the recording of neural activity during complex motor tasks, including  walking9. Much attention 
has been given to patients with Parkinson’s disease (PD), due to the multiple gait problems in these  patients10, 
their highly disabling impact and reduced quality of life and life  expectancy11,12, and the lack of specific therapies. 
Indeed, although dopaminergic  drugs10 and deep brain stimulation (DBS) provide sustained improvement to PD 
motor symptoms, their effect on gait impairment remains largely  unsatisfactory13,14 and over 40% of PD patients 
with DBS of the subthalamic nucleus (STN) report subjective worsening of gait performance after  surgery15.
The power of the beta band (~  13–30 Hz) observed in local field potential (LFP) recordings of the STN in 
PD was shown to correlate with the severity of low-dopamine symptoms, i.e., bradykinesia and  rigidity16. More 
recent data, however, suggest that striatal dopamine levels couple with STN oscillatory  frequency17, rather than 
power modulations, as an intrinsic property of the basal ganglia circuits for proper motor  performance18,19. This 
may especially apply to motor acts that involve large-scale brain networks, such as human  gait19. Indeed, although 
beta power changes during walking have been  reported20–24, this finding has not been fully  confirmed25,26. More 
recently, the observation by Thenaisie et al.27 that activation of lower leg muscles while seated, passive leg move-
ments, and walking along a horizontal ladder result in similar beta power modulation suggests that this may be 
a common aspect of motor control and not a distinctive feature of human walking.
We still know very little about the role of the STN in bipedal gait—one of the most unique and funda-
mental motor acts in  humans28—but this remains crucial in order to make the best use of new implantable 
pulse  generators29. To exploit the full potential of these devices, it is necessary not only to monitor symptom-
specific neural signals, but also their fluctuations during activities of daily living, such as  walking26,  grasping30, 
or  speech31, etc.
In this study we analyzed previously-acquired recordings with the Activa PC  + S device (Medtronic, PLC) 
and computed phase-amplitude coupling (PAC) during upright standing and unperturbed walking. We then 
correlated PAC measures with kinematic parameters of gait and striatal dopaminergic innervation. Both are two 
very accurate assessments that allow more precise correlations than routinely used clinical scales.
PAC likely reflects local activity subserving network communication through cross-frequency  interactions32,33 
and is instructive in describing the correlations between the different band rhythms or frequency components 
present in the LFP signal. The present report complements recent studies of subthalamic activity during human 
gait in  this19,26,34,35 and  other8 cohorts.
To the best of our knowledge, no previous work has studied changes in beta-gamma PAC in patients with PD 
during actual walking. Only one paper, by Jin et al.36 described the effect of timing (with a metronome) the step -
ping movement while sitting in a chair, however, this paper lacks a comparison with resting state data and patients 
were studied 3–7 days after the surgery without withdrawal of dopaminergic medication. In any case, the authors 
demonstrated greater beta-gamma PAC during non-timed stepping, possibly supporting a greater involvement 
of the basal ganglia circuitry during internally triggered movements. Of note, in this work the authors did not 
describe a significant difference of beta-gamma PAC for contralateral or ipsilateral movements suggesting the 
need for a more refined approach involving a distinction based on laterality and severity of symptoms or, when 
possible, neuroimaging studies describing striatal dopaminergic denervation.
Materials and methods
Subjects, surgery, clinical and molecular imaging evaluation
We studied eight subjects with idiopathic PD established according to the UK Parkinson Disease Brain Bank 
criteria. The dataset (with different conducted analyses) has already been published in a previous  article26. 
Demographic and clinical data are reported in the supplementary materials (Table S1). No patient suffered from 
cognitive or mood problems, as evaluated using standardized rating scales (i.e., Parkinson neuropsychometric 
dementia assessment, Mattis dementia rating scale, Hamilton depression rating scale, and the non-motor symp-
toms scale) and all had a stable and positive response to levodopa and STN-DBS (>  30% change in the Unified 
Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) part III score)  (see26).
All patients were implanted with the Activa PC + S system and quadripolar macroelectrodes (model 3389, 
Medtronic, PLC). The precise localization of the active and recording contacts in the STN was confirmed by 
image fusion of the preoperative stereotactic MRI and postoperative CT scans (SureTune™, Medtronic, PLC). 
The surgical procedure has been previously  described37.
Striatal dopamine reuptake transporters (DAT) density was assessed at rest using single-photon computed 
tomography (SPECT) and  [123I]N-ω-fluoropropyl-2β-carbomethoxy-3β-(4-iodophenyl)nortropane  ([123I]FP-
CIT). SPECT data acquisition and analysis have been described  previously26,38. Based on the non-displaceable 
binding potential  (BPND) of striatal DAT, we identified the STN of the brain hemisphere with less (−) or more 
( +) dopamine.
The local Institutional Review Board of the University Hospital of Würzburg approved the study and all 
patients gave written informed consent according to the Declaration of Helsinki.3
Vol.:(0123456789) Scientific Reports  |         (2024) 14:6674  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-57252-2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/Protocol and biomechanical assessment
Gait recordings were performed in the morning with more than 12 h withdrawal of all dopaminergic medica -
tions and off stimulation condition from at least 2 h. Subjects walked barefoot at their preferred speed over a 10 
m walkway (see supplementary material, Fig. S1). At the beginning of each walking trial, we recorded about 30 s 
of quiet upright standing (S). Patients performed at least three walking (W) trials (range three to six) according 
to their clinical condition. The gait cycle was assessed with an optoelectronic system (SMART-DX, BTS) and 
29 spherical retro-reflective  markers39,40 and three Inertial Measurements Units (IMU, Opal, APDM) placed on 
the sternum and outer  anklebones35,41. Gait trials were video recorded with two cameras (VIXTA, BTS). We also 
recorded surface muscle activity (FREEEMG, BTS) of the tibialis anterior, soleus, gastrocnemius, biceps femoris, 
and vastus lateralis, as well as the high-density, 64-channel electroencephalogram (EEG) (MOVE, Brain Products 
or Sessantaquattro, OTBioelettronica). All devices were synchronized as previously  described34,35. Electromyo -
graphy (EMG) and EEG signals were used in this study only for cleaning the LFP recordings from artefacts (see 
below). Gait cycles were defined by means of feet marker tracks with Matlab-based custom scripts (Matlab 2019, 
The MathWorks, Inc), as previously  described26. For each trial, we computed the stride duration, length, and 
velocity (normalized to subject’s height), as well as the stance and double-support duration (time-normalized 
as a percentage of the stride duration) for all strides at steady state  velocity42. For each subject and condition, all 
variables were averaged over the trials. For each subject, gait cycle variables were averaged across all available 
 strides43,44. For this study, we evaluated only gait trials unaffected by gait freezing or other gait disturbances (e.g., 
shuffling gait or festination).
Cleaning pipeline and artifact removals using independent component analysis
We recorded subthalamic LFP with a bipolar derivation for each STN crossing the clinically most effective and 
chronically active contact amplified by 2000 and sampled at 422 Hz. The LFP recordings may be contaminated 
by different types of  artifacts8,34. Here, we utilized independent component analysis (ICA) with fixed-point 
 algorithm45 on our whole set of data, i.e., a simultaneous recording of left and right STN LFPs along with EEG and 
surface bipolar EMGs, to identify the most contaminating sources of noise. Prior to running ICA, noisy channels, 
and epochs of data with abnormal amplitude and high amount of noise in EEG and EMG recordings were deleted 
by visual inspection of time series and spectrogram (see supplementary material, Fig. S2). The whole recordings 
were bandpass filtered from 0.5 to 100 Hz using a 5th order Butterworth bandpass filter (stopband1 = 0.5 Hz, 
stopband2  = 100 Hz; passband1  = 1 Hz, passband2  = 95 Hz). Then we identified independent components (ICs) 
using fixed-point algorithm and manually removed the ICs known to be related to cardiac rhythm and movement 
by looking at ICs’ time series and power spectra (see supplementary material).
Power spectral densities and spectral power
Walking trials were defined from the first to the last identified gait cycle event in continuous periods of walking. 
For each patient and state (S and W), all available trials were concatenated. Power spectral density (PSD) was 
computed using Welch’s method, with 1 s windows and 50% overlap and averaged across 100 permutations with 
an initial random point.
Phase‑amplitude coupling analysis
Of the several methods to compute  PAC46–50, we applied the Kullback-Liebler method based on the modulation 
index (MI), which is a measure of the entropy of phase-amplitude distribution. This method has demonstrated 
reliable results in several  studies17,51–53 and, with regards to our data sample, has the advantage of providing 
robust solutions over multiple computations. The shortest gait duration was ~ 13 s for patient wue07. Hence, 
PAC was calculated over 12.5 s for all patients, in either the S or W state. The clean LFPs were bandpass filtered, 
once in the beta band (10–30 Hz, 2 Hz steps, bandwidth 4 Hz) and once in the gamma band (40–100 Hz, 4 Hz 
steps, bandwidth 10 Hz). By applying Hilbert transform, the instantaneous phase and amplitude of the beta and 
gamma bands were extracted, and the correlation between the beta phase and gamma amplitude was computed. 
In more detail, for every 20 degrees interval of the instantaneous phase distribution, the entropy of the instan -
taneous amplitude envelope distribution was computed. The normalization of the entropy to the maximum 
value provided us with the MI factor. The bigger the MI, the more coupling that exists between the phase and 
amplitude of the two rhythms.
Statistical analysis
The significance of the observed PAC diagrams was computed on surrogate data, independent of the calculation 
 method54. There are several ways to make the surrogate data for this  purpose48, such as temporal shift in phase or 
amplitude signals obtained from the raw data. For each patient and state, we divided the amplitude vector into 
two halves and switched the first part with the second part and recalculated the PAC, as done in Bahramisharif 
and coll.55. We computed the surrogate PAC 200 times, cutting the raw data from random points in 12.5-s epochs 
and averaged the results. This formed the surrogate PAC and its subtraction from the original PAC (uncorrected) 
provided us with the corrected PAC  values48. This methodology removed the spurious peaks in the uncorrected 
PAC diagram and ensured elimination of the randomness and noise in the raw data that might be misleading 
in PAC computation. Finally, the individual PAC diagrams were normalized with respect to the maximum PAC 
value observed in one arbitrarily-selected patient (i.e., wue02). The uncorrected PAC values were compared 
with the surrogate PAC values in a t-test and only significant values (p  < 0.01) were shown in the PAC diagrams. 
The choice of 0.01 as the significant value is to reduce the false-positive results and is a level commonly used in 
previous  studies56.4
Vol:.(1234567890) Scientific Reports  |         (2024) 14:6674  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-57252-2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/To statistically quantify the PAC difference between S and W states  (PACS and  PACW), we summed all the 
MIs (total corrected PAC value) and assigned that number to each patient and corresponding state (S or W), 
as per Eq.  1.
where state  indicates S or W and n  is the total number of elements present in the PAC diagram. We also evalu -
ated the change of PAC between S and W (PAC△SW) and the total PAC value for the low beta band (13–20 Hz, 
L-PAC) and high beta band (20–30 Hz, H-PAC).
We compared the  PACW,  PACS, the L-PAC, and the H-PAC between states using paired t-test. To estimate 
linear correlation between kinematic or clinical data with PAC values, we utilized Pearson’s and Spearman’s cor -
relations considering the correction for multiple comparisons.
Ethical approval
University of Würzburg n. 103/20, n. 36/17, and n. 228/13.
Consent to participate and publication
All authors consent to participate in this research and the publication of the data and results.
Results
Demographic, clinical, biomechanics and molecular imaging data
A detailed description of the demographic and clinical data, imaging, and biomechanics for each of our patients 
has previously been  reported19,26,35. In summary, at the time of the study the mean age of the patients was 57 
years (±  4.8 SD) and the mean disease duration was 12 years (± 4.2 SD). All patients improved after STN-DBS 
by more than 60% at the UPDRS-III score. The mean percentage reduction of levodopa equivalent daily dose 
after STN-DBS was 43.4%. In the more dopamine-depleted brain hemisphere (STN-), the reduction of DAT 
averaged 70.5% (±  10.1 SD), while in the other hemisphere (STN  +) it was 60.2% (±  12.0 SD). The kinematic data 
and correlations are shown in Fig.  3.
Power spectral densities and spectral power
At a group level, we did not find any significant power modulation between standing and  walking26,35. However, 
we have noticed great variability among patients, and we consider it important to present in the supplementary 
material the individual patient assessment of the PSDs (Figures S3, S4) and band power distributions (Figures S5, 
S6).
PAC diagrams
We evaluated the mean behavior of PAC changes for each patient by taking the average of all PAC diagrams 
for S and W states for both STN- and STN + (see Fig. S7 for individual PAC diagrams in S and W) and found 
a significant increase in PAC between the two states (Fig.  1) in both STN- (Fig.  1A–C) and STN  + (Fig.  1D–F). 
Statistical significance (utilizing paired t-test) was achieved for H-PAC and L-PAC, but lower frequencies showed 
more predominant PAC modulation (Fig.  2).
Correlation between PAC measurements and clinical and biomechanical data
Clinical severity measured with UPDRS-III scores did not correlate with  PACS (STN- r = −0.32, p = 0.22; 
STN + r = 0.51, p = 0.1),  PACW (STN- r = −0.27, p = 0.26; STN + r = 0.23, p = 0.29) and with PAC△SW (STN- 
r = −0.24, p = 0.28; STN  + r = 0.10, p = 0.59).
In the more dopamine-depleted brain hemisphere (STN-), low PAC values in walking and low PAC changes 
between conditions (PAC△SW) resulted in more time spent in the weight support phase (stance or double sup-
port) of the gait cycle (Figs.  3 and 4 ). Stance duration and double support duration correlated selectively with 
PAC measurements of the STN- (Figs.  3 and 4 ). Nevertheless, these results were carried out by estimating the 
Pearson correlation. In addition, we conducted the Spearman correlation to check the non-linear correlation of 
the same values and we did not find any significant correlation.
Correlation between PAC measurements and  BPND
In the less dopamine-depleted brain hemisphere (STN +), the more striatal dopamine, the more the PAC 
increased during walking (Fig.  5). This result was confirmed by a separate evaluation of  BPND of the caudate 
nucleus and the putamen (Table  1). For STN- we did not find any correlation between PAC measurements and 
 BPND (Table  1). These results were obtained by estimating Pearson correlation, however, for the case of Fig.  5, 
we also estimated the Spearman correlation on the same data and found that there is a significant correlation 
(r = 0.6, p = 0.05) in STN + .
Discussion
We have shown an increase in subthalamic beta-gamma PAC between standing and walking in PD. Patients 
with poor PAC modulation during walking spent more time in the weight-bearing (stability) phase of the gait 
cycle. Striatal dopamine promotes gait-related cross-frequency coupling in the STN of parkinsonian patients.
Human walking is a complex motor behavior that requires timed coordination of several cortical and subcor -
tical brain  areas1–3. The STN is a key node of the supraspinal locomotor network that is directly connected to the (1) PAC state=/summationdisplay n
k=1MIk5
Vol.:(0123456789) Scientific Reports  |         (2024) 14:6674  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-57252-2
www.nature.com/scientificreports/supplementary motor and parietal areas and projects to the mesencephalic locomotor  region57,58. In recent years, 
technological  advances29 have enabled important information to be obtained about the composite subthalamic 
dynamics of human  locomotion9,13. Some studies reporting basal ganglia field potential recorded from implanted 
DBS leads in patients with PD showed modulation of beta oscillations during stepping and actual  gait21–24. Still, 
the analysis of power spectral modulation might not fully capture the complex large-scale network dynamics of 
gait  control25,26, which eventually encompass multiple  frequencies19 to timely direct the information flow across 
distant brain  areas32,59–62. Indeed, there is growing evidence that frequency modulation conveys information 
about movement execution in a patient-specific and frequency-related  manner18,19,30,61,63, and that dopamine 
deficiency results in impaired encoding of this  information18,30.
DE
FAB
CAmplitude Fr equency (Hz)
Phase Fr equency (Hz) Phase Fr equency (Hz) Phase Fr equency (Hz) Phase Fr equency (Hz)
Standing           Wa lking Standing           Wa lking
Figure 1.  Phase-amplitude coupling (PAC) diagrams. Mean PAC values with STN- or STN + in standing (A  
and D, respectively) and walking (B  and E ) and boxplots (C  and F ) for total PAC during the two conditions 
(p = 0.002 and p = 0.003, respectively, Kruskal–Wallis test). The boundaries of the box plots indicate the 25 and 
75 percentiles of the distributions, and the red lines show their median. The means of the distributions were 
added as blue-filled circles. The red plus sign indicates the outlier of the distribution. STN, subthalamic nucleus 
(+ / − , more or less dopaminergic innervation).
p-val~0.02p-val~0.04p-val~0.04p-val~0.09
p-val~0.04
p-val~0.04
***
**L-PA C
H-PA CSTN-
STN+ 0.004AB C
Figure 2.  Comparison between H-PAC and L-PAC. Distributions of the L-PAC and H-PAC values during 
standing, walking, and their difference for both STN- and STN + groups, shown by boxplots. The boundaries of 
the box plots indicate the 25 and 75 percentiles of the distributions, and the black/gray lines show their median. 
The means of the distributions were added as red/blue diamonds. The red plus signs indicate the outliers 
of the distributions. Significant p -values (using paired t-test) are marked by an asterisk. H- or L-PAC, total 
phase-amplitude coupling value for the high or low beta band; STN, subthalamic nucleus (+ / − , more or less 
dopaminergic innervation).