1
Vol.:(0123456789) Scientific Reports  |         (2024) 14:4855  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-55093-7
www.nature.com/scientificreportsDepression, anxiety, and personal 
recovery outcomes after group vs 
individual transdiagnostic therapy: 
a brief report
Sayani Paul 1, Lynn Zhu 1,2, Jane Mizevich 1 & Lindsay Slater 1*
Unified Protocol for Transdiagnostic Treatment of Emotional Disorders (UP) is an evidence-informed 
treatment utilizing Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT) treatment principles. UP has demonstrated 
promising treatment effects comparable to single disorder protocol across several mental disorders. 
Its impact on personal recovery in anxiety and depression has not been examined. This study 
compares clinical and personal recovery outcomes of UP treatment for depression and anxiety 
disorders when delivered in a group vs. individual format. Retrospective chart review of outcomes 
was conducted for outpatients receiving 12-week individual (n  = 65) and group (n  = 62) UP treatment 
in a specialized psychiatric hospital. Descriptive and repeated measures ANOVA analyses were 
conducted on outcomes on Overall Depression Severity and Impairment Scale, Overall Anxiety 
Severity and Impairment Scale, Recovery Assessment Scale administered pre and post treatment. On 
average, participants in both group and individual UP treatment showed improvements in anxiety, 
depression, and recovery scores. Greater proportion of group participants showed improvements 
on two interpersonal-focused domains of personal recovery. Results indicate group UP treatment is 
comparably effective compared to individual UP in improving clinical and recovery outcomes, and 
treatment modality affects the degree of personal recovery. Overall findings offer important clinical 
promise of UP treatment as a transdiagnostic treatment option for individuals with anxiety and 
depression.
Keywords  CBT, Unified protocol, Personal recovery, Transdiagnostic, Anxiety, Depression
Globally, depressive and anxiety disorders are leading contributors of health-related burden on quality of  life1. 
Effectiveness of Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT) is well  documented2 as a gold standard for treatment of 
mood and anxiety disorders 3. However, comorbidities of other complex mental health disorders can complicate 
and decrease the effectiveness of traditional single disorder protocol (SDP)4. Further, it may be costly to provide 
diagnosis specific treatment, especially in an outpatient setting.
To effectively deal with comorbidities and facilitate access to treatment, transdiagnostic interventions have 
been  developed4, which apply the same underlying treatment principles across different mental disorders without 
tailoring the protocol to each  diagnosis5. Unified Protocol for Transdiagnostic Treatment of Emotional Disorders 
(UP)6 is an evidence-informed psychotherapy that when delivered  individually7–9, has demonstrated promising 
treatment effects compared to  SDP7. Few studies indicate that when delivered in a group setting, UP can be as 
effective as individual  UP4,10,11. This is in line with a strong body of research indicating that group psychotherapy 
demonstrates outcomes equivalent to those of individual  therapy12. The authors found that group psychotherapy 
demonstrated large effects of disorder-specific symptom reduction associated with anxiety, obsessive compulsive 
disorder and depression; medium effects for eating disorders and posttraumatic stress disorder, and small effects 
for substance use disorders and schizophrenia. They also found that the differences between group psychotherapy 
and other active conditions such as individual therapy are negligible in terms of effect  size12.
Personal recovery is an ongoing individual process that focuses on instilling a sense of purpose and hope, 
strengthening connections, making meaning of individual’s experiences of mental illness and empowering 
individuals to re(establish) a meaningful life despite persistent  symptoms13,14. Recovery in the mental health 
context refers to the process of changing one’s attitudes, values, feelings, goals, and skills to live a satisfying life OPEN
1Ontario Shores Centre for Mental Health Sciences, 700 Gordon St, Whitby, ON L1N 5S9, Canada. 2Faculty of 
Health Sciences, Ontario Tech University, Oshawa, Canada. *email: slaterl@ontarioshores.ca2
Vol:.(1234567890) Scientific Reports  |         (2024) 14:4855  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-55093-7
www.nature.com/scientificreports/within the limitations caused by illness. It contrasts with the clinical recovery concept that emphasizes one’s 
psychiatric symptoms and  functioning15. The concept of personal recovery aligns well with positive psychiatry 
and positive psychology as they imply optimism that despite the mental illness symptoms, improvement is 
possible, and well-being is  achievable16. Aligning with positive psychiatry that encompasses psychological 
aspects such as optimism, resilience, personal mastery, coping, self-efficacy, social engagement, and spirituality, 
personal recovery involves a healing process and restoring balance despite the mental  illness13,16,17. In this process 
the individual learns to accept the mental illness and shifts their attitude towards optimism and personal and 
professional goal attainments. Research is limited on impact of UP on personal recovery outcomes. A few studies 
have examined the impact of single disorder CBT on personal recovery in  schizophrenia18,19, but we did not find 
any studies focusing on UP or other transdiagnostic interventions and personal recovery.
Research shows that the therapeutic benefits of group psychotherapy, in general include development of 
social techniques, imitative behaviours, interpersonal learning and group  cohesiveness19, all of which are in line 
with personal recovery principles. Additionally, Barlow and  Farchione20 highlighted that group psychotherapy 
facilitates normalization of experiences from listening to others with similar difficulties, provides opportunities 
for exposures, promotes engagement because of group support or from watching others, as well as sometimes 
makes it easier to apply treatment concepts and skills by applying it to a group member’s situation, which is 
also consistent with recovery principles. In this way, offering UP in a group setting may more strongly support 
principles of the recovery model than individual UP treatment and therefore show greater recovery-related 
outcomes for group therapy participants than for individual therapy participants.
It has been noted that group psychotherapy helps to increase the availability of resources by having one 
practitioner deliver treatment to a group of  individuals20. An especially cost-effective way of delivering group 
psychotherapy is by using transdiagnostic interventions, which can target multiple diagnoses within the same 
group. Transdiagnostic interventions such as UP align well with the stepped care approach to  treatment21. 
According to the Mental Health Commission of  Canada22 stepped care is a person-centred approach to mental 
health care that organizes and delivers evidence-based programming aligned with recovery principles and 
improves equitable and timely access to mental health resources. Since the rationale behind stepped care is to 
provide more cost-effective and less time-intensive  care23, transdiagnostic approaches such as UP are very much 
in line with this philosophy in that they can address more than one disorder at a time without needing to provide 
different protocols for each disorder.
This study compares clinical and personal recovery outcomes of UP treatment for depression and anxiety 
disorders when delivered in a group vs. individual format. Our hypotheses were:
1. Participants in both group and individual setting will have similar clinical outcomes.
2. Participants in group UP may experience better personal recovery outcomes compared to those who received 
UP individual session.
Methods
Participants and setting
This study was conducted at the Anxiety and Mood Disorders (AMD) clinic—an outpatient program at Ontario 
Shores Centre for Mental Health Sciences (Ontario Shores)—a public tertiary psychiatric teaching hospital 
located in Ontario, Canada’s most populous province. As a leader in recovery oriented and client centered care, 
the hospital offers a range of specialized mental health services to individuals struggling with mental illness and 
their families.
Individuals who received a DSM-5 diagnosis of anxiety and/or mood disorders after a standard diagnostic 
assessment based on a clinical interview with a psychiatrist or a nurse practitioner at Ontario Shores were referred 
to the AMD clinic where they could attend either individual or group psychotherapy, based on their preference. 
In this study, we included adults (18–65 years) with moderate to severe anxiety disorders and/or depression 
who received individual (n  = 65) and group ( n = 62) UP treatment. Consistent with the transdiagnostic goals of 
unified CBT, participants in both group and individual therapy presented with a variety of chronic and severe 
mental health primary diagnoses. Individuals with acute and active psychosis, significant cognitive impairment, 
and those with a tendency to be disruptive in groups were excluded. This study was approved by the Research 
Ethics Board (REB) of Ontario Shores (REB # 18-018-B).
Study design
We reviewed the clinical charts of eligible participants to compare measures captured pre- and post-UP among 
participants receiving individual and group UP treatment. Participants receiving group and individual UP were 
selected and matched as closely as possible on potential confounders, i.e., gender, age, diagnosis, symptom 
severity, and number of sessions attended.
UP treatment
Between August 2018 to March 2020, individuals participated in a 12-week UP therapy, either in group or 
individual format, co-facilitated by trained psychotherapists following the guidelines of their professional 
regulatory colleges. Each group UP session was 90 min and attended by 6 to 12 participants weekly, while 
individual UP was conducted at therapist’s office for 50 min every week. Treatment content followed the UP 
 manual7 covering nine modules (Appendix A) and were same for individuals and groups. Practice homework and 
workbook readings were assigned after each individual and group UP session. Group UP also offered participants 
the opportunity to practice the skills learned in group or pairs.3
Vol.:(0123456789) Scientific Reports  |         (2024) 14:4855  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-55093-7
www.nature.com/scientificreports/Data collection
All participants completed the following instruments before and at the completion of the UP treatment with a 
psychotherapist.
1. Overall Anxiety Severity and Impairment Scale (OASIS)—a five-item self-report measure that is used to 
assess severity and impairment associated with any anxiety disorder or multiple anxiety  disorders24. It is 
scored out of 20 and present with strong psychometric properties, indicating the applicability of this scale in 
a wide range of anxiety related disorders. Higher OASIS scores specify greater anxiety-related severity and 
impairment.
2. Overall Depression Severity and Impairment Scale (ODSIS) is a brief, five-item scale for assessing the 
frequency and intensity of depressive symptoms, as well as functional impairments in pleasurable activities, 
occupational, and interpersonal relationships due to  depression25. It is also scored out of 20 and higher 
ODSIS indicates greater depression severity and impairment. The validity and reliability of the scale is well 
established in multiple  cultures26.
3. Recovery Assessment Scale (RAS-24 [RAS]) is a self-reflective assessment used to measure individuals’ 
perceptions of individual  recovery27. The soring is done on a five-point Likert scale, with higher score 
indicating better personal recovery. RAS is one of the most widely used personal recovery  measures28 in 
recovery-oriented mental healthcare settings. Its 24 items have shown good reliability, validity, and  utility29, 
and represent five domains—personal confidence and hope, willingness to ask for help, goal and success 
orientation, reliance on others, and no domination by symptoms.
Ontario Shores REB approved the study as a minimal risk retrospective chart review with no additional patient 
interaction. Obtaining informed consent would have required contacting each patient directly post-therapy, 
increasing the risks to patient privacy and burden. To protect patient privacy, the researchers were blinded 
to identifying patient information during the chart review, and only anonymized study data were extracted 
and analysed. The inclusion of data for this research did not impact patient therapy in any way. All research 
procedures have been conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
Data analysis
We conducted repeated measures ANOV A analysis (with a Bonferroni correction at p  = 0.0125 for multiple 
comparisons) on pre and post outcome measures. To understand frequency of change, we summarized the score 
changes descriptively. Due to the relatively small sample and heterogeneity in participant comorbidities, we are 
underpowered to complete subgroup analyses.
Results
One hundred and twenty-five participants took part in UP treatment, with 64 participants opting for group UP 
treatment (62.5% female; 44.5  ± 10.4 years [25–65]) and 61 participants in the individual UP treatment (59.0% 
female; 44.0  ± 10.8 years [25–65]). All participants presented with anxiety and/or a mood disorder, with 28.1% 
of group and 52.5% of individual UP treatment participants also presenting with additional complex mental 
health diagnoses (Fig.  1a,b). Table  1 shows statistically significant improvements in anxiety, depression and 
overall recovery scores among participants who completed either the individual or the group UP . On average, 
participants of both group and individual UP treatment showed improvements in scores measuring anxiety 
(OASIS; group: 15.81% improvement in scores post-intervention, p  < 0.001; individual: 16.6%, p  = 0.015), 
depression (ODSIS; group: 19.98% improvement, p  = 0.004; individual: 21.91%, p < 0.001), and recovery (RAS; 
group: 9.10% improvement, p  = 0.002; individual: 9.40%, p < 0.001). Statistically significant differences between 
individual and group change scores were not found. Table  1 suggests greater proportion of group UP participants 
showed improvements in their ‘Willingness to ask for help’ (35.2% of group participants vs 21.8% individual) 
and ‘Reliance on others’ subscales of the RAS (28.07% group participants vs 24.1% individual).
Discussion and conclusion
Aligning with previous  research4,10,11 and our first hypothesis, we found that group UP is comparably effective in 
improving clinical outcomes compared to individual UP . We also found greater improvements in some recovery 
outcomes post-group UP , suggesting promising advantages of group modality over individual treatment. Group 
UP offered opportunities for participants to practice asking one another for help, and may add additional layers 
of peer support, exposure, and shared learning environment that enhanced personal recovery outcomes related 
to interpersonal trust. Although the need for recovery-focused CBT is well  documented19, research have not yet 
focused on the impact of UP on personal recovery in anxiety and depression. Our results suggest UP is associated 
with more consistent effects for anxiety and depression than for personal recovery. This is to be expected as 
participants were primarily seeking treatment for anxiety and mood disorder symptoms. As well, personal 
recovery is a highly personal construct with multiple domains and is dependent on a variety of influences, 
as demonstrated by the differences shown in participants’ recovery subscale outcomes. This highlights the 
importance of prioritizing individual recovery subscale scores, as well as the overall scores. Overall, these findings 
expand the literature showing some advantages of group UP over individual treatment to promote recovery-
oriented care for individuals with comorbid conditions. It is worthy to note that compared to the individual UP 
group, a smaller proportion of group UP participants presented with another mental health disorder additional 
to anxiety and/or depression. This suggest the promising effects of group UP on clinical and recovery scores may 
also be due to lower complexity patients self-selecting for this type of therapy modality.4
Vol:.(1234567890) Scientific Reports  |         (2024) 14:4855  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-55093-7
www.nature.com/scientificreports/Our findings offer important clinical and research implications. Given the high demand for mental health 
services worldwide, group UP can increase simultaneous access to evidence-informed psychotherapy by multiple 
clients, thereby reducing wait times and strains on the mental health system. Further, given the considerably 
high (75%) comorbidity for depressive and anxiety  disorders30, many individuals do not fit into a specific SDP . 
Beyond the Unified Protocol’s potential to offer treatment for those with comorbidities, this therapy approach is 
also promising to treat clients across multiple diagnoses together (e.g. post-stress disorder, bipolar disorders, etc.). 
The transdiagnostic nature of the UP program is captured in the Fig.  1a and b. Such individuals may benefit from 
UP , since transdiagnostic CBT are more effective in addressing co-morbidity than SDP  CBT31. Additionally, UP 
involves simplified training efforts requiring fewer hours to train clinicians, this treatment modality is more cost-
effective7 and at times preferred by clinicians who find SDP overwhelming to learn and implement effectively, 
especially when psychiatric comorbidity is present.
Improvements post-group UP in interpersonal-related personal recovery outcomes may be promising 
to promote sustained treatment effectiveness. However, further exploration of the clinical mechanisms and 
dynamics that group UP offers is required. UP modules include interventions not offered in all SDPs (e.g., …with Bipolar II disorder…with Delusional disorder…with Generalized anxiety disorder…with Major depressive disorder…with Post…with Other speciﬁed bipolar and related 
…with Panic disorder …with Persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia )
…with Agoraphobia
…with Alcoho l …with Bipolar I disorder…with Bipolar II disorder…with Borderline personality …with Generalized anxiety …with a Major depressive  …with Panic disorder…with Persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia) …with Pos/g425rauma/g415c stress disorder
Figure 1.  (a) Comorbidity distribution of group  Unified Protocol CBT participants showing the transdiagnostic 
profiles of the program attendees. All participants were receiving services at an Anxiety and Mood Disorders 
clinic, and presented with symptoms of anxiety and/or mood disorders with or without an additional mental 
health disorder. (b ) Comorbidity distribution of individual  Unified Protocol CBT participants showing the 
transdiagnostic profiles of the program attendees. All participants were receiving services at an Anxiety and 
Mood Disorders clinic and presented with symptoms of anxiety and/or mood disorders with or without an 
additional mental health disorder.5
Vol.:(0123456789) Scientific Reports  |         (2024) 14:4855  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-55093-7
www.nature.com/scientificreports/mindfulness, emotion regulation, motivational interviewing), and thus future studies are needed to explore if 
and how these components advance personal recovery outcomes. More research is also needed to explore the 
efficacy of this transdiagnostic intervention in other populations, such as children and adolescents, as well as 
when UP is delivered virtually.
Study limitations include the relatively small sample size limiting subgroup analysis within treatment 
modalities. As well, this study was not able to provide insights about the sustainability of the effects observed. 
Given that client contact post-discharge was not usual protocol, the Research Ethics Board did not approve 
further research-related follow up to limit client burden. Further, these findings may not be applicable to inpatient 
populations who may have more complex needs.
Despite these limitations, this study offers important clinical promise for individuals with anxiety and 
depression and expands the current literature by demonstrating that group UP is comparable to individual 
UP , and present with advantageous over individual UP on select personal recovery outcomes. The findings also 
show the promise of UP as an additional evidence-based psychotherapy option that can benefit individuals with 
comorbid or more complex mental health disorders.
Data availability
The datasets generated and/or analysed during the current study are not publicly available due to privacy reason 
but are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
Received: 16 August 2023; Accepted: 20 February 2024
References
 1. Santomauro, D. F. et al. Global prevalence and burden of depressive and anxiety disorders in 204 countries and territories in 2020 
due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Lancet  398(10312), 1700–1712. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1016/  S0140- 6736(21)  02143-7  (2021).
 2. Hofmann, S. G., Asnaani, A., Vonk, I. J. J., Sawyer, A. T. & Fang, A. The efficacy of cognitive behavioral therapy: A review of meta-
analyses. Cogn. Ther. Res. 36(5), 427–440. https://  doi. org/ 10. 1007/  s10608-  012-  9476-1  (2012).
 3. David, D., Cristea, I. & Hofmann, S. G. Why cognitive behavioral therapy is the current gold standard of psychotherapy. Front. 
Psychiatry  9, 4–4. https://  doi. org/ 10. 3389/  fpsyt. 2018.  00004  (2018).Table 1.  (a) Clinical and personal recovery outcomes of participants before and after attending either 
individual or group UP , (b) Greater proportion of participants improved on interpersonal-based personal 
recovery subscales after group UP vs individual (box). *Bonferroni corrected p < 0.0125 was used for 
significance testing.(a)Individual Group
Mean scores pre-UP Mean scores post-UP p* Mean scores pre-UP Mean scores post-UP P*
Anxiety (OASIS) 11.79 ± 4.36 9.83 ± 4.18  < 0.001* 11.51 ± 4.17 9.69 ± 5.13 0.015
Depression (ODSIS) 11.82 ± 4.21 9.23 ± 4.87  < 0.001* 11.11 ± 4.61 8.89 ± 5.28 0.004*
Recovery (RAS) 73.73 ± 12.41 80.66 ± 16.46 0.002* 74.98 ± 10.75 81.80 ± 15.67  < 0.001*
(b)
