In this article, we discuss the traditional behavioral models of depression and some of the challenges analyzing a phenomenon with such complex and varied features. We present the traditional model and suggest that it does not capture the complexity of the phenomenon, nor do syndromal models of depression that dominate the mainstream conceptualization of depression. Instead, we emphasize ideographic analysis and present depression as a maladaptive dysregulation of an ultimately adaptive elicited emotional response. We emphasize environmental factors, specifically aversive control and private verbal events, in terms of relational frame theory, that may transform an adaptive response into a maladaptive disorder. We consider the role of negative thought processes and rumination, common and debilitating aspects of depression that have traditionally been neglected by behavior analysts.

As the field of clinical behavior analysis grows, it will benefit from analyses of increasingly complex and common clinical phenomena, especially those with significant public health implications. One such phenomenon is clinical depression, considered to be the ‘‘common cold’’ of outpatient populations. Up to 25 million people in the United States alone meet criteria for some type of depressive disorder in a given year. Depressive disorders also result in considerable financial expenditure including time spent away from the workplace and an increase in health care costs. Based on broad measures that include work absenteeism, treatment costs, and other factors, the annual economic cost of depressive disorders in the United States may be over $40 billion. Suicide is the ultimate cost.

Perhaps nowhere in clinical psychology is the medicalization of behavioral problems more complete than with depression. Depression is largely seen by the general public and mainstream media as a neuropsychiatric illness with a fluctuating course that is best described in disease-state terms such as disorder, episodes, remission, recovery, relapse, and recurrence. An additional assumption is that this disorder may be diagnosed and labeled using the symptom checklists of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. The basic ontological assumption is that depression is an illness that occurs episodically and can be described adequately in medical terms. Thus, more depression is treated in primary care than in any other mental health or health care setting, and guidelines for treatment in these settings recommend antidepressant treatment without specialty referral unless the patient has complicating factors such as comorbid substance use or suicide risk. Even in these cases, specialty referral is first to psychiatry for medication management, and only a small number of individuals diagnosed with depression will be seen by a clinical psychologist, much less a behaviorally oriented practitioner.

A hallmark of behavior analysis has been its condemnation of the misappropriation of lay terms as scientific, technical terms. The first task is precise specification of the behavioral phenomena invoked by the term. There are several obstacles to achieving this precision with the term depression, which have been excellently presented for the term anxiety. The case for depression is quite similar. First, the term depression was never meant as a technical term and actually has a metaphorical, idiomatic basis. Second, our psychiatric nomenclature and mainstream usage of the term suggest that depression is an empirical phenomenon with an essential composition. To a behavior analyst, the term depression is not a technical term, does not precisely map onto any empirical or behavioral phenomena, and has no essential composition. Thus, given the exhaustive medicalization of the phenomenon of depression, there exists an immense gap between a behavioral analysis of depression and mainstream usage of it as a medical term with its various associations and meanings.

Behavior-analytic writings on clinical depression have been illuminative but sparse. Although research on depression has outpaced research on virtually every other disorder by psychiatric and cognitive-behavioral researchers, behavior analysts have been alarmingly silent. There are undoubtedly many reasons for this silence. More relevant to the current paper is the possibility that the exhaustive medicalization of the term; the wealth of non-behavior-analytic research data on biology and genetics, personality, and cognitive factors; and the emphasis on private events in depression—on how depression feels and on changing that feeling—may function to evoke avoidance in behavior analysts.

This is unfortunate because behavior analysis can not only provide an integrative view of depression, taking into consideration genetics, biology, enduring patterns of responding labeled personality, verbal behavior, and private events, but it can do so with theoretical consistency and pragmatic utility unmatched by other theoretical systems. In this paper, we attempt to start at the beginning, with a discussion of what depression is to a behavior analyst and how this contrasts with mainstream usage of the term as a medical syndrome. We review the traditional operant model of depression that emphasized reductions in behavior as a response to environmental events. We then tackle several areas of inquiry important to an understanding of depression that have traditionally been neglected by behavior analysts, including private events and the role of verbal behavior in depression. We see this not as completing a behavioral analysis but as a reminder of the importance of idiographic, functional analyses of specific individuals for this complex phenomenon.