Previous studies on the natural progression of long-COVID have been limited and selective, lacking comparison groups to differentiate the disease progression from symptoms resulting from other causes. The Long-COVID in Scotland Study is a nationwide, general population cohort of adults with confirmed Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 infection, matched to polymerase chain reaction-negative adults. Serial, self-completed online questionnaires were used to collect information on pre-existing health conditions and current health six, 12, and 18 months after the index test. Among those with previous symptomatic infection, 35% reported persistent incomplete or no recovery, 12% reported improvement, and 12% reported deterioration. At six and 12 months, one or more symptoms were reported by 71.5% and 70.7% respectively of those previously infected, compared with 53.5% and 56.5% of those never infected. Altered taste, smell, and confusion improved over time compared to the never infected group and adjusted for confounders. Conversely, late onset dry and productive cough, and hearing problems were more likely following Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 infection.

Understanding the scale and natural history of long-COVID is essential to planning health and social care. The majority of studies report the prevalence of long-COVID at a single time point post-infection, with some adjusting for pre-existing symptoms. Less is known about changes in long-COVID over time. Studies with serial outcome measurements have been restricted to selected groups or specific outcomes, or have lacked a comparison group making it difficult to distinguish persistent or late-onset symptoms of long-COVID from symptoms that would have occurred anyway in the absence of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 infection. Hospital cohorts have variously reported no change, improvement, and deterioration over time. Some studies have highlighted the possibility of late-onset sequelae.

Therefore, while long-COVID may be a stable condition in some, existing evidence suggests that others may experience recovery, relapse, or progression. Serial questionnaire data from the Long-COVID in Scotland Study was used to investigate the natural history of long-COVID in an unselected, general population cohort with confirmed Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 infection compared with symptoms in an age-, sex-, and socioeconomically-matched group of people who have never been infected.

This study reports the trajectory of long-COVID in the general population compared to contemporaneous changes in symptoms and quality of life in a comparison group that had never been infected. Beyond 6 months following Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 infection, there was no significant overall change in either self-reported recovery status or the percentage of people reporting at least one symptom known to be associated with previous Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 infection. However, 12% of people reported improvements in their recovery status, and 12% reported deterioration. These different trajectories were driven by different symptoms. In some people, altered taste, smell, and confusion resolved over time whereas others reported late-onset dry or productive cough and hearing problems. These changes were not explained by underlying trends or confounding. The findings demonstrate the importance of exploring individual symptoms rather than only grouping them together as a composite outcome.

The Long-COVID in Scotland Study is an ambidirectional, general population cohort. The National Health Service Scotland notification platform for Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 polymerase chain reaction results was used to identify eligible participants and invite them via automated SMS text messages. Every adult in Scotland with a positive polymerase chain reaction test from April 2020 was invited along with a comparison group who had had a negative test but never a positive test.