Artificial intelligence, particularly machine learning, has been increasingly utilized in the support of diagnosing, monitoring, and managing neurodegenerative movement disorders, such as Parkinson's disease. This is challenging due to the high variability between individuals and the similarity of symptoms between different neurodegenerative disorders in their early stages. This review aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the application of artificial intelligence through machine learning algorithms in the kinematic analysis of movement disorders, with a specific focus on Parkinson's disease. It surveys research conducted within a specific timeframe, analyzing studies that utilized machine learning algorithms for diagnosis and assessment of Parkinson's disease using data related to the motion of upper and lower extremities.

Healthcare has been a fertile ground for the development and implementation of advanced technologies, including artificial intelligence, wearable sensors, augmented and virtual reality, among others. Artificial intelligence covers a broad range of technologies that aim to mimic human cognitive functions and intelligent behavior. Its recent growth has been significantly propelled by advances in machine learning, which includes powerful algorithms that enable systems to identify patterns within data, classify and predict outcomes through experience. Machine learning has found a significant place in healthcare, contributing to diagnostics, disease management, and monitoring.

A study that investigated the accuracy of traditional methods for clinical diagnosis using post-mortem neuropathological examination found that the clinical diagnosis of Parkinson's disease had certain limitations, especially in early diagnosis. The main clinical features of Parkinson's disease include tremor, bradykinesia, rigidity, and postural instability, which affect both upper and lower extremities and can hinder patients' performance of everyday tasks, even in the earliest stages of the disease. Therefore, evaluating these symptoms through the analysis of body movements is an important part of clinical assessment and diagnosis of Parkinson's disease.

Since reliable diagnostics and early stage detection are priorities in medical practice, there is a significant effort in developing new methods for diagnostic support that would enhance accuracy while minimizing required time and resources. Information about the patient's condition and symptoms outside of clinical settings could provide physicians with deeper insight into disease severity and progress, paving the way toward personalized treatment. Tools based on artificial intelligence have great potential for improving the accuracy, reliability, and efficiency of clinical decision-making and assessment. Machine learning approaches are frequently used for generating diagnostic suggestions using data collected from various sources, and for real-time, remote monitoring and detection of disease severity, symptoms, and response to therapy.

This paper aims to provide a high-level overview of the benefits that artificial intelligence, specifically machine learning, has brought to the diagnosis and management of Parkinson's disease, as well as the instrumentation and technologies that have enabled it.