Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=uabn20
AJOB Neuroscience
ISSN: 2150-7740 (Print) 2150-7759 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/uabn20
Dealing With Side Effects of Deep Brain
Stimulation: Lessons Learned From Stimulating
the STN
Markus Christen, Merlin Bittlinger, Henrik Walter, Peter Brugger & Sabine
Müller
To cite this article:  Markus Christen, Merlin Bittlinger, Henrik Walter, Peter Brugger & Sabine
Müller (2012) Dealing With Side Effects of Deep Brain Stimulation: Lessons Learned From
Stimulating the STN, AJOB Neuroscience, 3:1, 37-43, DOI: 10.1080/21507740.2011.635627
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/21507740.2011.635627
Published online: 05 Jan 2012.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 358
View related articles 
Citing articles: 7 View citing articles 
AJOB Neuroscience , 3(1): 37–43, 2012
Copyright c/circlecopyrtTaylor & Francis Group, LLC
ISSN: 2150-7740 print / 2150-7759 online
DOI: 10.1080/21507740.2011.635627
Article
Dealing With Side Effects of Deep
Brain Stimulation: Lessons Learned
From Stimulating the STN
Markus Christen, University of Zurich and University of Notre Dame
Merlin Bittlinger, Charit ´e-Universit ¨atsmedizin Berlin
Henrik Walter, Charit ´e-Universit ¨atsmedizin Berlin
Peter Brugger, University Hospital Zurich
Sabine M ¨uller, Charit ´e-Universit ¨atsmedizin Berlin
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is increasingly investigated as a therapy for psychiatric disorders. In the ethical evaluation of this novel approach, incidence and impact
of side effects (SE) play a key role. In our contribution, we analyze the discussion on SE of DBS of the subthalamic nucleus (STN)—a standard therapy for movement
disorders like Parkinson’s disease (PD)—based on 66 case reports, 69 review papers, and 347 outcome studies from 1993 to 2009. We show how the DBS commu nity
increasingly acknowledged the complexity of STN-DBS side effects. Then we discuss the issue of study quality and the methods used to assess SE. We note that some
side effects are the subject of conﬂicting evaluations by the different stakeholders involved. This complicates the ethical controversy inherent i n any novel treatments for
diseases that involve psychiatric aspects. We delineate how the lessons from STN-DBS could guide future DBS applications in the ﬁeld of psychiatry.
Keywords: : deep brain stimulation, neuroethics, Parkinson’s disease, psychiatry, side effects, subthalamic nucleus
Since the advent of medicine, the maxim “do not harm your
patient” forms the core of the ethos for physicians. This is
reﬂected in the principle of nonmaleﬁcience as one of the
four principles of biomedical ethics (Beauchamp and Chil-dress 2009). Nevertheless, it is broadly acknowledged that
harmful side effects (SE) of therapies have to be weighed
up against their beneﬁcial effects. The deliberation of harmsand beneﬁts becomes more difﬁcult if side effects of novel
therapeutic approaches have to be considered, of which the
nature, extent, and incidence are not yet known.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is an example for a novel
therapeutic approach. Its roots go back to the early 1950s
(Hariz et al. 2010), and it emerged in its current form inthe 1980s as an alternative for ablative surgery in move-
ment disorders and an experimental therapy in chronic pain
(Siegfried and Blons 1997). DBS became an established ther-apy for Parkinson’s disease (PD) and other movement dis-
orders in the last decade (Benabid et al. 2009). Side effects
have been discussed since the advent of DBS, but the sen-sibility for them and the appreciation of their complexity is
increasing. This also reﬂects the maturation of the therapy.
The term “side effect” does not provide per se an ethical
orientation how to deal with a speciﬁc therapy. Therefore,
This research has been supported by the Swiss Academy of Medical Sciences (K ¨athe-Zingg-Schwichtenberg-Fonds) and by the Federal
Ministry of Education and Research, Germany (project 01 GP 0804).Address correspondence to Markus Christen, PhD, MSc, University of Zurich, Institute of Biomedical Ethics, Pestalozzistrasse 24, CH-8032Z¨urich, Switzerland, or Department of Psychology, 118 Haggar Hall, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA. E-mail:
christen@ethik.uzh.chterms like “adverse events” or “sequelae” (adverse events
that count as long-term negative consequences) should be
avoided as long as the negative evaluation of the side effect
is not clear. For assessing particular side effects, they canbe classiﬁed along the two dimensions predictability and
evaluation (Table 1).
As Table 1 shows, only one type of side effects (pre-
dictable and clearly outweighing the beneﬁts) bears the
clear “ethical message” that the therapy should not be ap-
plied or that research on this therapy should be stopped.Thus, the determination of what counts as an adverse event
involves both a measurement problem and an evaluation
problem, which can be entangled in the process of devel-oping the therapy (M ¨uller and Christen 2011). DBS for PD
patients is a paradigmatic example for outlining that prob-
lem, since ﬁrst, the predictability of side effects for individ-ual patients is difﬁcult; second, the evaluation of some side
effects differs signiﬁcantly between patients, their relatives,
and physicians (M ¨uller and Christen 2011); and third, both
the disease (Kulisevsky et al. 2008) and alternative thera-
peutic approaches (medication or surgery; see Voon et al.
2006 and Olanow 2002) may involve effects similar to thoseof DBS.
ajob Neuroscience 37AJOB Neuroscience
Table 1. Ethical requirements depending on the predictability and the evaluation of the side effects of a therapy
Predictability of side effects (SE) of a therapy
Evaluation Predictable Not predictable
The SE of the therapy clearly
outweigh its therapeutic effects.Do not begin/stop the therapy. Ensure sensibility for novel SE.
There are conﬂicting evaluations of
the SE by different stakeholders.Deﬁne the authority to decide about the
usage of the therapy.Ensure involvement of different
stakeholder’s perspectives duringthe development of the therapy.
The therapeutic effects clearly
outbalance the SE.Deﬁne a procedure to take individual
variability of the impact of the SE intoaccount.Deﬁne a procedure to decide whether
a novel SE is classiﬁed asunproblematic or not.
The following investigation is based on a comprehen-
sive analysis of the research literature on DBS in the nucleus
subthalamicus (STN), currently the preferred target for DBS
in PD. This analysis covers 66 case reports, 69 review papers,and 347 outcome studies from 1993 to 2009 that emerged
from an extensive search in the following databases: CPCI-S,
Embase, Francis, Medline, PsychINFO, and SCI-expanded(the reference lists are available as supporting online mate-
rial).
As the STN is part of various thalamo-cortical circuits
(Marani et al. 2008), the relatively high incidence of cog-
nitive and affective side effects after STN DBS comparedto other DBS targets is not surprising (Hariz et al. 2008).
The way the DBS community dealt with this issue is thus a
paradigmatic case for analyzing SE measurement and eval-uation in the course of the establishment of novel therapies.
Understanding this process may support the ethical analysis
of the current application of DBS to a variety of psychiatricdisorders (for an overview about psychiatric DBS, see Krack
et al. 2010).
THE COMPLEXITY OF ADVERSE EVENTS
Since the early 1990s, the STN has been investigated as a
potential DBS target both in animal and clinical studies. In
1993, the ﬁrst case was published in a French journal (Pollaket al. 1993). Several case reports and outcome studies fol-
lowed, and since the late 1990s the number of publications
on STN-DBS has increased steadily (M ¨uller and Christen
2011). The number of STN-DBS-related issues discussed in
the literature has grown rapidly, whereas a bibliometric in-
vestigation demonstrated that case reports spearhead thetransdisciplinary communication about DBS (Christen and
M¨uller 2011).
To handle the complexity of issues that are discussed in
our literature body of 482 STN-DBS publications, we have
sorted them into 18 issue classes (Table 2). For each class,
we have evaluated all tests used in the outcome literature tomeasure the respective phenomena and the wording used
to describe the corresponding SE. Note that not every is-
sue class is directly related to SE. This is true especially forstudies on the neuronal basis of DBS effects (usually in-vestigated by PET) or about the cost-effectiveness of DBS.
Furthermore, the boundaries between some issue classes
are less clear and require predeﬁnitions. For example, we
have classiﬁed studies about language ﬂuency as “cogni-tive” (in accordance with the current neuropsychological
understanding).
Each publication (case report, review, outcome study)
was attributed to one or several issue classes with regard
to the topics discussed and the methods used. Thereby we
did not take into account possible causal relations between
certain issues. For example, many issues have an impact on
the quality of life (Q). Nevertheless, a study whose primaryfocus, for example, was insomnia was only classiﬁed as “I,”
not as “Q.” For analyzing the time course of the publication
praxis, it was necessary to build bigger groups. Therefore,we have grouped the 18 issue classes into four groups as
follows:
1. Group: Understanding therapeutic effects: F, M, V.
2. Group: Medical and technical intervention issues: O, P,
T.
3. Group: Main affective, behavioral and cognitive side ef-
f e c t so fD B S :B ,C ,D ,L ,Q .
4 . G r o u p :O t h e ri s s u e s :A ,E ,I ,K ,N ,S ,W .
The histogram in Figure 1 shows the time course of the
different groups of issues in the DBS literature. The absolutenumbers of publications per year belonging to one of the
four issue groups are displayed for the years 1993 to 2009.
The analysis reveals that—after the ﬁrst, pioneering yearswith very few studies—issues on main affective, behavioral,
and cognitive side effects quickly appeared in the literature
and have been the dominant group since 2003. This ﬁnd-ing is corroborated by an analysis of DBS posters presented
at conferences (Christen and M ¨uller 2011). Although one
has to take into account that this analysis is not sensiblefor the valuation of these effects (i.e. whether they are con-
sidered to be unproblematic or not), this ﬁnding somehow
contrasts with several statements in the literature, such thatthe DBS community would often ignore the neurobehav-
ioral consequences of the therapy (e.g., Burn and Tr ¨oster
2004).
38ajob Neuroscience January–March, Volume 3, Number 1, 2012Dealing With Side Effects of DBS
Table 2. Issue classes of therapeutic effects and side effects present in the STN-DBS literature
Group Abbr. Issue class Examples of side effects
Group 1 F Functional studies, i.e., studies that involve PET
or other methods for investigating the causal
effect of DBS—
M Motor effects Apraxia, axial symptoms, dyskinesia, dystonia,
gait disorders, motor ﬂuctuations
V Issues related to Levodopa and other
medicationDopamine dysregulation syndrome, changes in
LEDD
Group 2 O Operation/surgery related issues Hemorrhage, hematoma, ischemia, surgical
complications, infections
P Patient issues, i.e., issues related to patient
selection, patient management, rehabilitation—
T Effects related to the technology (device) Battery problems, electrode break, local
infections, lead fracture, pulse generator
malfunction
Group 3 B Behavioral effects, i.e., effects that concern
abnormal behaviorCompulsive shopping, hypersexuality,
hypomania, pathological gambling, suicide
(attempts)
C Effects on cognition (reasoning, memory, etc.) Cognitive decline, confusion, dementia,
memory decline, verbal ﬂuency change
D Depression, anxiety, apathy and other mood
effectsAhedonia, apathy, depression, mood changes,
sadness
L Language, i.e., effects regarding the general
speech ability and motor aspects of speechAphasia, dysarthria, hypophonia, speech
impairment, voice freezing
Q Quality of life and social aspects Disability in daily living, decreased life
satisfaction, partnership problems
Group 4 A Effects regarding the autonomous nervous
system, autonomous functioningDrooling, dysphagia, hyperhidrosis
E Emotion recognition changes Difﬁculties of emotion discrimination,
difﬁculties of face perception, hyperemotivity
I Insomnia, i.e., effects related to sleep Drowsiness, fatigue, insomnia, sleep disorders
K Cost issues (German: Kosten ), i.e., cost–beneﬁt
studies, cost-effectiveness of DBS, etc.—
N Other neurological effects Epilepsy, postural imbalance, seizures
S Effects regarding sensory systems Blurred vision, parasthesia, visual
hallucinations
W Weight and energy intake changes Abnormal weight gain, binge eating, obesity
Note. Only selected examples of side effects using the wording found in the publications are displayed.
QUALITY OF STN-DBS STUDIES
The sensibility for new side effects in the process of matura-
tion of a novel therapy is a critical issue—and we may say
that the DBS community has passed this test successfully.Another issue is the quality of the studies. Although it is well
known that novel therapies start with isolated case stud-
ies that usually lack quality criteria like randomization orblinding, at some point the urge for better studies is raised.
DBS did not deviate from this development path, and vari-
ous authors have discussed the issue of study quality (e.g.,Woods et al. 2006) and proposed standards for improving
study quality (e.g., Morrison et al. 2000). We investigated
the study quality for all outcome studies that involved atleast one issue of group 3 (i.e., B, C, D, L, or Q). For that,we expanded the criteria for level of evidence assignment
proposed by Martinez-Martin and Deuschl (2007) using a
rating system that involves several aspects being consid-
ered as relevant for study quality (e.g., regarding follow-uptime) by the DBS community.
1
1. Each study was assigned with points as follows: study was
prospective: +1; study was case-controlled with at least 20 partic-
ipants in each branch: +2(+1 if less than 20 participants in either
branch); study was randomized: +1; test evaluation was blinded:
+1; study involved more than one center: +1; the presurgery and
postsurgery assessment of the neuropsychiatric tests were made inthe “best” (pre: med-on/ post: med-on, stim-on) condition of thepatient: +2(+1 if the assessments were made pre and post); the
study involved at least 20 patients: +1; the study had a follow-up
January–March, Volume 3, Number 1, 2012 ajob Neuroscience 39AJOB Neuroscience
020406080100120140160
93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09Group 4
Group 3
Group 2
Group 1
Year# of appearance in studies
Figure 1. The histogram displays the total number of issues (compare with Table 2) addressed in the publications
about STN-DBS (case reports, reviews, and outcome studies) pooled in four groups (group 1: F, M, V; group 2: O, P , T;g r o u p3 :B ,C ,D ,L ,Q ;g r o u p4 :A ,E ,I ,K ,N ,S ,W ;s e et e x t ) .
As Figure 2a demonstrates, the quality range of the stud-
ies is broad. Somewhat surprising is the fact that the meanquality of the outcome studies has not increased signiﬁ-
cantly since 2000 (Figure 2b; earlier studies were not taken
into account due to their low numbers). Although the ab-solute number of high-quality studies of group 3 has in-
creased, this is shrouded by the also increasing number of
outcome studies of poor quality.
This absent increase of the average study quality is not
per se problematic, as long as the community is able to dif-
fer between good and poor studies. To investigate whetherthis is the case, we calculated a citation coefﬁcient based on
DBS review papers about the outcome studies of group 3.
2
Then we performed a correlation analysis of the relation-
ship of this citation coefﬁcient and the quality rating for
each study. The result is a (weak) positive correlation of the
citation coefﬁcient with the quality rating (Pearson’s corre-
lation coefﬁcient: 0.29). That means that high-quality papers
tend to be cited more often in the reviews. This can be in-terpreted as a hint for a higher appreciation of high-quality
studies of group 3 by the DBS community.
time of at least 12 months: +1; the study involved tests of at least
three issue classes: +1.
2. The citation coefﬁcient was construed as follows: We countedthe appearance of outcome studies in the analytic part of reviewsthat either performed a meta-analysis following established stan-dards (e.g., Cochrane) or were at least systematically evaluated(i.e., we excluded merely narrative reviews; thus, we considered23 reviews). The citation of outcome papers is weighted with theprobability of being able to be cited due to the year of publication totake into account, such that a paper, e.g., published in 2006 cannotbe cited in a review published in 2004. Thus, each outcome paperreceived a citation coefﬁcient value between 0 and 1. For the cor-relation analysis, only outcomes with nonzero citation coefﬁcienthave been analyzed.MEASURING ADVERSE EVENTS
After analyzing the attention for side effects of group 3 and
the quality of the studies investigating them, we investi-
gated a third issue: To what extent do the studies capture
“relevant” side effects, i.e. those reﬂecting serious ethicalissues (see Table 1)? This point requires a closer look to the
methods and tests used in the outcome studies. We listed all
tests used in the 347 outcome studies and attributed themto one of the 18 issue groups. By far most of the tests were
assigned to one of the ﬁve issue classes B, C, D, L, and Q
(group 3), whereas the internal distribution is very uneven.Figure 3a demonstrates that more than half of all methods
applied are tests regarding cognitive issues. Also, the num-
ber of uses of the tests themselves is remarkably uneven.Very few tests are used regularly. Furthermore, the proba-
bility that a test is used in a study for neuropsychological
outcome assessment does not correspond completely to thefour standards proposed in the literature (Defer et al. 1999;
Morrison et al. 2000; Pillon 2002; Saint-Cyr et al. 2000). For
example, the Hopkins Verbal Learning Test and the OddMan Out Test, both recommended in all four standards, are
comparably rarely used. This may indicate a learning effect
by the community, as tests better than the ones initially rec-ommended are available that measure similar constructs.
For the ethical evaluation it is of particular interest
which perspectives are represented in the tests, as conﬂict-
ing evaluations of side effects often result from different
perspectives of stakeholders. For analyzing this point, wehave classiﬁed all tests as follows:
I. Test scores that result from the evaluation of the pa-
tient’s performance by a trained evaluator.
II. Test scores that result from a self-assessment of the pa-
tient.
40ajob Neuroscience January–March, Volume 3, Number 1, 2012Dealing With Side Effects of DBS# of outcome studies
012345678 90102030
01 03 05 07 091234567
2 4 6 8 100.10.20.30.40.5
00 02 04 06 08(a) (b) (c)
mean quality rating
citation coefficient
Y ear Quality Rating Quality Rating
Figure 2. (a) Quality rating distribution of the outcome studies of group 3, (b) time course of the mean quality
rating of outcome studies (group 3), and (c) correlation between the citation coefﬁcient of studies (which reﬂects theappreciation of papers by the authors of reviews) with the quality rating of the studies. The chart also includes the
linear approximation of the correlation.
III. Test scores that result from an interrogation etc. from
closely related persons of the patient (family members,
caregivers).
In order to avoid biases due to low-quality studies, we
have only investigated those studies that achieved a qualityrating of at least 5 (see footnote 1, 182 studies). We have
counted the number of different tests, the number of test
executions (i.e., in how many studies the test was used),and the number of patients that have been tested by these
methods. The cumulative numbers for the three classes I, II,
and III are displayed in Figure 3b.
We see a clear dominance of category I tests, whereas
the usage of category III tests is basically nonexistent. Thus,
the perspective on side effects is very biased in the DBS
literature. This ﬁnding might explain the “satisfaction gap”
between the physician’s and the patient’s expectation thatis discussed in the literature (Agid et al. 2006).
THE ETHICS OF ADVERSE EVENTS: CONCLUSIONS
AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PSYCHIATRIC DBS
What is the impact of this in-depth analysis of the literature
about side effects of STN-DBS for the ethical debate aboutthe application of DBS in psychiatry? Compared to many
somatic diseases, harm–beneﬁt assessments for psychiatric
therapies are complicated by at least three problems: First,
for most psychiatric disorders no clear correlation with aspeciﬁc neurological dysfunction is proven. Second, many
interventions affect various neuronal mechanisms—e.g., se-
lective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI) have effects notonly on the serotonin metabolism, but also on the neuro-
genesis in the hippocampus (Santarelli et al. 2003). Third,
the evaluation of both the disease and the beneﬁcial andnegative therapy effects depends much more strongly on
subjective evaluations compared to somatic medicine. For
example, neither patients nor their relatives nor their physi-cians would doubt that toothache is painful, whereas hy-
pomania is evaluated differently by different stakeholders
(see, e.g., the examples in Krug et al. 2010). “Clear-cut” cases(predictable side effects that clearly outbalance therapeutic
effects) are probably rather rare in psychiatric diseases.
This is important, since the introduction of DBS to psy-
chiatry is driven also by the expectation that it will im-
prove the understanding of the causes of these diseases and
that it will be a causal therapy. Already the usage of DBSfor the treatment of movement disorders was accompanied
(a) (b)
020406080100120
D BC LQ
Event Class# Tests
050100150200250300350
02 0004 0006 0008 00010 00012 000
I
Test FocusII III# Tests / Test executions
# Patients testedNumber of different tests 
Number of test executions 
Number of patients tested
(right scale)
Figure 3. (a) Number of tests per issue class (B: behavioral, C: cognitive, D: depression and other mood issues, L:
language, Q: quality of life). (b) Number of different tests (ﬁrst bar in each group), number of accumulated test
executions (middle bar), and total number of patients tested (left bar, right scale) with methods of either class I (test
scores generated by evaluator), II (self-assessment of patient), or III (test scores emerge from persons afﬁliated to thepatient).
January–March, Volume 3, Number 1, 2012 ajob Neuroscience 41AJOB Neuroscience
by the narrative that DBS is more precise than its alter-
natives, completely reversible, and individually scalable.
Although this is to a large extent true, the problems of mea-
suring and evaluating side effects do not vanish. On the con-trary, our analysis revealed that the availability of a more
precise tool triggered research on the mechanisms behind
the effects of DBS on cognitive functions, mood, and behav-ior and thus tends to increase the spectrum of potential SE
to look at. If DBS will play an important role in psychiatry,
we cannot expect that the SE spectrum will become smallercompared to that implicated by the alternatives.
However, we have found a well-developed sensibil-
ity for side effects in the DBS community. Nevertheless,
the side effects are not yet measured and evaluated sufﬁ-
ciently. Our analysis reveals that the majority of methodsused investigate subtle cognitive changes that may be sta-
tistically signiﬁcant but whose relevance for the patients
is unclear. Only a minority of investigations focus on theself-assessment of the patients, and even less on the as-
sessments of their caregivers. This methodological bias im-
plies blindness for certain side effects. We expect that thisproblem will be aggravated if DBS is used to treat psychi-
atric disorders as depression or addiction, since interper-
sonal relationships play a crucial role in overcoming thesedisorders.
Finally, the quality of studies that promote the extended
use of DBS gives cause for concern, although we note thatour rating system does not take into account that the re-
quirements for quality may differ between studies if they
addressed different types of outcomes, such that not allquality items are required for a speciﬁc study. After all,
progress is recognizable and the community is somewhat
able to discriminate between good and bad studies, yet ithas not managed to cut down the continuous generation of
low-quality contributions.
In summary, the ethical evaluation of side effects of STN-
DBS must not abstract from the measurement and evalua-
tion problems that constitute the deﬁnition of what counts
as a “side effect.” The role of ethicists is not only to safe-guard against the “bad effects” of therapies. They should
also point at blind spots in clinical studies and widen the
perspective on all sorts of effects of new therapies.
REFERENCES
Agid, Y., M. Sch ¨upbach, M. Gargiulo, et al. 2006. Neurosurgery in
Parkinson’s disease: the doctor is happy, the patient less so? Journal
of Neural Transmission Suppl . 70: 409–414.
Beauchamp, T. L., and J. F. Childress. 2009. The principles of biomedical
ethics , 6th ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Benabid, A. L., S. Chabardes, J. Mitrofanis, and P. Pollak. 2009. Deep
brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus for the treatment ofParkinson’s disease. Lancet Neurology 8(1): 67–81.
B u r n ,D .J . ,a n dA .I .T r ¨oster. 2004. Neuropsychiatric complications
of medical and surgical therapies for Parkinson’s disease. Journal of
Geriatrics, Psychiatry and Neurology 17: 172–180.Christen, M., and S. M ¨uller. 2011. Single cases promote knowledge
transfer in the ﬁeld of DBS. Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 5:
article 13.
Defer, G. L., H. Widner, R. M. Mari ´e, P. R ´emy, and M. Levivier. 1999.
Core Assessment Program for Surgical Interventional Therapies
in Parkinson’s Disease (CAPSIT-PD). Movement Disorders 14: 572–
584.
Hariz, M. I., S. Rehncrona, N. P. Quinn, J. D. Speelman, C. Wens-
ing, and the Multicentre Advanced Parkinson’s Disease Deep Brain
Stimulation Group. 2008. Multicenter study on deep brain stimu-lation in Parkinson’s disease: An independent assessment of re-
ported adverse events at 4 years. Movement Disorders 23(3): 416–
421.
Hariz, M. I., P. Blomstedt, and L. Zrinzo. 2010. Deep brain stimula-
tion between 1947 and 1987: The untold story. Neurosurgery Focus
29(2): E1.
Krack, P., M. I. Hariz, C. Baunez, J. Guridi, and J. A. Obeso. 2010.
Deep brain stimulation: from neurology to psychiatry? Trends in
Neuroscience 33(10): 474–484.
Krug, H., O. M ¨uller, and U. Bittner. 2010. Technological interven-
tions in the self? An ethical evaluation of deep brain stimulation
relating to patient narratives. Fortschritte der Neurologie Psychiatrie
78: 644–651.
Kulisevsky, J., J. Pagonabarraga, B. Pascual-Sedano, C. Garc ´ıa-
S´anchez, and A. Gironell. 2008. Prevalence and correlates of neu-
ropsychiatric symptoms in Parkinson’s disease without dementia.Movement Disorders 15;23 (13): 1889–1896.
Marani, E., T. Heida, E. A. Lakke, and K. G. Usunoff. 2008. The
subthalamic nucleus. Part I: development, cytology, topographyand connections. Advances in Anatomy, Embryology. and Cell Biology
198: 1–113.
Martinez-Martin P, and G. Deuschl. 2007. Effect of medical and sur-
gical interventions on health-related quality of life in Parkinson’s
disease. Movement Disorders 22(6): 757–765.
Morrison, C. E., J. C. Borod, M. F. Brin, et al. 2000. A program for neu-
ropsychological investigation of deep brain stimulation (PNIDBS)
in movement disorder patients: Development, feasibility, and pre-
liminary data. Neuropsychiatry, Neuropsychology and Behavioral Neu-
rology 13(3): 204–219.
M¨uller, S., and M. Christen. 2011. Deep brain stimulation in Parkin-
sonian patients—Ethical evaluation of cognitive, affective, and be-havioral sequelae. AJOB Neuroscience 2(1): 3–13.
Olanow, C. W. 2002. Surgical therapy for Parkinson’s disease. Eu-
ropean Journal of Neurology 9(suppl. 3): 31–39.
Pillon, B. 2002. Neuropsychological assessment for management of
patients with deep brain stimulation. Movement Disorders 17(suppl.
3): S116–S122.
Pollak, P., A. L. Benabid, C. Gross, et al. 1993. Effets de la stimulation
du noyau sous-thalamique dans la maladie de Parkinson. Revue
Neurologique (Paris) 149(3): 175–176.
Saint-Cyr, J. A., and L. L. Tr ´epanier. 2000. Neuropsychologic as-
sessment of patients for movement disorder surgery. Movement
Disorders 15(5): 771–783.
42ajob Neuroscience January–March, Volume 3, Number 1, 2012Dealing With Side Effects of DBS
Santarelli, L., M. Saxe, C. Gross, et al. 2003. Requirement of hip-
pocampal neurogenesis for the behavioral effects of antidepres-
sants. Science 301: 805–809.
Siegfried, J., and S. Blons. 1997. The neurosurgical treatment of Parkin-
son’s disease and other movement disorders . London: William & Wilkins
Europe Ltd.Voon, V., C. Kubu, P. Krack, J. L. Houeto, and A. I. Tr ¨oster. 2006.
Deep brain stimulation: Neuropsychological and neuropsychiatric
issues. Movement Disorders 21(suppl. 14): S305–S326.
Woods, S. P., J. D. Rippeth, E. Conover, C. L. Carey, T. D. Parsons,
and A. I. Tr ¨oster. 2006. Statistical power of studies examining the
cognitive effects of subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation in
Parkinson’s disease. Clinical Neuropsychologist 20(1): 27–38.
January–March, Volume 3, Number 1, 2012 ajob Neuroscience 43