Contents listsavailableat ScienceDirect
MedicalHypotheses
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/mehy
EarlydiagnosisofParkinson’sdiseaseusingmachinelearningalgorithms
Zehra KarapinarSenturk
Duzce University, Engineering Faculty, Department of Computer Engineering, 81620 Duzce, Turkey
ARTICLEINFO
Keywords:
Decision supportsystemsFeatureselection
Machine learning
MedicaldiagnosisSupport VectorMachinesABSTRACT
Parkinson’sdiseaseiscausedbythedisruptionofthebraincellsthatproducesubstancetoallowbraincellsto
communicatewitheachother,calleddopamine.Thecellsthatproducedopamineinthebrainareresponsiblefor
thecontrol,adaptationandfluencyofmovements.When60–80%ofthesecellsarelost,thenenoughdopamineis
notproducedandParkinson’smotorsymptomsappear.Itisthoughtthatthediseasebeginsmanyyearsbeforethemotor(movementrelated)symptomsandtherefore,researchersarelookingforwaystorecognizethenon-motor symptoms that appear early in the disease as early as possible, thereby halting the progression of the
disease. In this paper, machine learning based diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease is presented. The proposed di-
agnosis method consists of feature selection and classification processes. Feature Importance and RecursiveFeature Elimination methods were considered for feature selection task. Classification and Regression Trees,
ArtificialNeuralNetworks,andSupportVectorMachineswereusedfortheclassificationofParkinson'spatients
intheexperiments.SupportVectorMachineswithRecursiveFeatureEliminationwasshowntoperformbetterthantheothermethods.93.84%accuracywasachievedwiththeleastnumberofvoicefeaturesforParkinson’s
diagnosis.
Introduction
Parkinson’s is a slow progressing neurodegenerative brain disease
[1]. Neurodegenerative means that it causes loss of brain cells. Nor-
mally,therearebraincellsthatproducedopamineincertainregionsof
the human brain. These cells are concentrated in a certain area of the
brain called substantia nigra. Dopamine is a chemical that transmits
messages between the substantia nigra and other brain regions thatcontrolbodymovements [1].Dopamineallowspeopletomakesmooth
and harmonious movements. When 60–80% of dopamine producingcells are lost, not enough dopamine can be produced and motor
symptomsofParkinson'sdisease(PD)appear.Theearliestsymptomsof
PDappearintheentericnervoussystem,lowerbrainstemandolfactory
tracts. PD spreads from these regions to the higher parts of the brain,
namely the substantia nigra and the brain shell [1]. It is thought that
thediseasebeginsmanyyearsbeforethemotorsymptomssuchaslossor decrease of sense of smell, sleep disturbances and constipation,
tremor and slowing of movement. Besides, 90% of PD patients faces
withvocalimpairments [2].Therefore,theresearchersarelookingfor
waystorecognizethesenon-motorsymptomsthatappearearlyduringthe disease as early as possible, thereby halting the progression of the
disease.
Machine learning (ML) is frequently used for medical disease di-
agnosis recently because of its implementation convenience and highaccuracy[3]. ML has also been used for the treatment of PD in the
literature.[4]reviewedthepapersforfeatureselection(FS)tobeused
forMLinbrainsurgery.DuringbrainsurgeryforPD,thetrueregionto
beoperatedisdeterminedbyanMLbasedapproach.Thispaperfocuses
onthestudiesafterPDisdiagnosed. [5]usedMLmethodstoestimate
cognitive consequences of PD. [6]predicted the tremor level of PD
patients by an ML application. Stage prediction of PD was also per-
formed by ML [7]. But mostly, the researchers focus on the early di-
agnosis of PD by this popular approach, ML. [8]tried to predict PD
based on the motion data acquired from upper limbs of people. Theresearchers made the experimental objects (both PD patients and
healthypeople)wearadeviceintotheirupperlimbsanddirectedthem
to do several performance tasks. Spatiotemporal and frequency data
analysis was performed to obtain parameters and then different su-
pervisedlearningmethodswereusedforclassification.Differentfeature
extractionmethodsandMLmethodswereusedforthedetectionofPD
in[9].TheyshowedthatphonationisthemostconvenienttaskforPD
detection. K-NN, Multilayer Perceptron (MLP), Optimum Path Forest,and Support Vector Machines (SVM) were the evaluated classifiers in
thestudy.Voicefeatureswerereducedusingartificialneuralnetworks
fortheMLbaseddiagnosisofPDin [10].Classificationwasperformed
by SVM. Different from the others an unsupervised method was also
used for PD [11]. After dimension reduction by partial least squares,
self-organizing map (SOM) was used for clustering and incremental
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mehy.2020.109603
Received17December2019; Receivedinrevisedform22January2020; Accepted24January2020E-mail address: zehrakarapinar@duzce.edu.tr.Medical Hypotheses 138 (2020) 109603
0306-9877/ © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Tsupport vector regression prediction. UPDRS (Unified Parkinson’s Dis-
easeRatingScale)waspredictedinthestudy. [12]compareddifferent
methods and decided neural networks as the best performing MLmethodfortheproblem. [13]usedfuzzyC-meansclusteringforfeature
weightingandk-NNforclassificationinPDdiagnosistask.WeightedPD
datasetwasgiventok-NNclassifierfordifferentkvaluesandthebestk
value was determined. [14]used Extreme Learning Machines for PD
diagnosis. Imbalanced data was enhanced by a weighted strategy andnon-linearmappingofkernelfunction.ABCalgorithmwasusedforFS
and optimization of parameters. [15]performed a successful decision
for PD diagnosis using PCA (Principle Component Analysis) for di-
mensionreduction,FDR(FisherDiscriminantRatio)forFSandSVMfor
classification. Although they obtained very high classification ac-
curacies, they used more than 100 features extracted from brain MRI
images. Therefore, their computational cost is high. Abdulhay et al.
[16]investigatedgaitandtremorforthediagnosisofPD.Gaitfeatures
were extracted from the raw data obtained from PhysioNet database.Peaksandpulseswereevaluatedfromthephysicalsignalsobtainedvia
the sensors located into the underneath of the subjects’ feet. They
achieved 92.7% classification accuracy. [17]used voice features of a
commondataset.Theyappliedfeatureaugmentationandobtained177features from 44 features on the dataset. After feature augmentation,
theyusedReliefFtofilteroutthemosteffectivefeaturesandatlast66
features were used for the classification of PD. PD was also diagnosed
viahandwritingtasks [18]ratherthanMRI,motion,orvoicedatausing
MLmethods.
Althoughhighclassificationrateswereobtainedintheliteraturefor
ML based diagnosis of PD, either they used many features (like[9,14,16]) which increases computation time or the extraction of the
featureswerehardeventheyusefewfeatures.Therefore,indirectly,the
computationtimeisagainhigh.Inthispaper,decreasingcomputation
time via less amount of effective features, a lightweight feature ex-
traction process and a classifier have been aimed. The features areobtainedfromthespeechsignalsandsotoobtainthefeaturesiseasier
thantheotherMRI-based [15]ormotion-based[7,15]methodsinthe
literature.Althoughsomeauthors(suchas[8,9,12])usedvoicefeaturesfor the diagnosis of PD, they used more number of features than the
proposed approach. The least number of features were used in [16]
with an acceptableclassification accuracy, buttheyused MRIdatafor
featureextractionandit isharderthanobtainingvoicefeatures.
The main contributions of the proposed ML based early PD diag-
nosismethodare givenbelow.
•Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE) and Feature Importance (FI)
methods were used for the determination of the most relevant fea-
tures tobeusedin theclassificationtask.
•The importance of using FS methods in the preprocessing phase ofclassification of PD patients was proven. The performance of SVM
classifier hasbeenimprovedabout13%by FS.
•TheleastnumberofvoicefeaturesintheliteraturewereusedforPDdiagnosis and very high detection accuracies (93.84%) were ob-
tainedwithlesseffort.
•Theperformancesofdifferentpopularclassifierswereevaluatedandthebestclassifierwas foundasSVMforPDdiagnosisproblem.
•Different optimizers were evaluated for the dataset and the bestoptimizerwas determined.
•Theproposedmethodisbetterthantheothermethodswithrespecttocomputationalcostsincefewnumberofvoicefeatureswereused
instead of heavy feature extraction processes such as MRI, motion
sensorsorhandwritingassessments.
Materials
The dataset used in the experiments of this study consists of the
featuresobtainedfromthespeech signalsof31peopleattheNational
CentreforVoiceandSpeech,Denver,Colorado.Thedatasetwascreatedby Max Little from University of Oxford and donated to UCI Machine
Learning Repository [19]. 23 of the 31 people have PD and 8 of them
arethecontrolgroup.Thereare195biomedicalvoicemeasurementsinthedataset. Table1showsthevoicemeasuresusedintheexperiments.
Statuscolumninthedatabasedefinestheclassandgets0forhealthy,1forPD.Classdistributionofthedatasetisshownin Fig.1.Thereare48
healthyphoneticsand147 PDphoneticsthatbelongto31people.
Methods
FSwasperformedonthe23voicefeatures.ByperformingFS,only
the effective features were used and the cost of the analysis was re-
duced.DifferentFSalgorithmswereappliedfordifferentclassification
methods. New feature subsets and classifications were generated by
usingthesealgorithmsfromtheoriginalfeatureset.Performanceofthe
modelwas evaluatedbasedon multiplecriteria. Fig.2shows theflow
chartof thestudy.
Feature selection
FSwhichisapreprocessingphaseindatascienceidentifiesthekey
features of the problem [20]. Satisfactory determination of attributes
hasabigsignificancetoimprovetheaccuracyofclassification.Overall
performance of ML methods can be improved by dimensionality re-
duction[21]. Jain and Singh says “The application ofclassificationTable1
Thevoicemeasuresusedintheexperiments [19].
Featureno Voice measure MEANING
1 MDVP:Fo(Hz) Averagevocalfundamentalfrequency
2 MDVP:Fhi (Hz) Maximumvocal fundamentalfrequency
3 MDVP:Flo(Hz) Minimumvocalfundamentalfrequency
4 MDVP:Jitter(%) Severalmeasuresofvariationin
fundamentalfrequency 5 MDVP:Jitter(Abs)
6 MDVP:RAP
7 MDVP:PPQ
8 Jitter:DDP
9 MDVP:Shimmer Severalmeasuresofvariationinamplitude
10 MDVP:Shimmer (dB)
11 Shimmer:APQ3
12 Shimmer:APQ5
13 MDVP:APQ
14 Shimmer:DDA
15 NHR Twomeasuresofratioof noisetotonal
componentsinthe voice 16 HNR
17 RPDE Twononlineardynamical complexity
measures 18 D2
19 DFA Signalfractalscalingexponent
20 spread1 Threenonlinearmeasuresoffundamental
frequencyvariation 21 spread2
22 PPE
23 status Healthstatusofthesubject:(1)Parkinson’s,
(0)healthy
Fig.1.Class distributionoftherecordedphoneticsin thedataset.Z. Karapinar Senturk Medical Hypotheses 138 (2020) 109603
2algorithmson disease datasets yields promising results by developing
adaptive, automated and intelligent diagnostic systems for chronic
diseases.”[21].FShasmanyadvantagessuchassavingtimeforfuture
data collection, understanding causes of diseases, less computationalcost, no degradation in performance [20]. Therefore, in this paper we
usedFSforthediagnosisofPD.DifferentFSmethodsweretriedfortheproblemandtheyareUnivariateSelection(US),RFE,andFI.FImethod
was determined to be used in Classification and Regression Trees
(CART) classification method, and RFE method was used in SVM and
Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) classification methods. These FS
methods wereselectedbasedontheperformanceof theclassifier they
wereused.FImethodgivesascoreforeachfeatureinthedatasetand
higherscoreimpliesthatthefeatureismorerelevanttotheoutputdata
variable. RFE method fits a model and removes the weakest feature
untilthedesirednumberoffeaturesisreached.Featuresarerankedand
recursivelyeliminatedinloops.Unlikecorrelationbasedmethods,RFE
utilizesSVM.Ittrainstheclassifierandoptimizestheparameters.Then
it computes the ranking criterion for all features and removes the fea-
turewithsmallestrankingcriterion [22].
Classification
CART, SVM and ANN methods were applied to the problem of
classifying PD patients and healthy people. CART is a nonparametric
statistical methodology and it helps to understand variables or inter-
actionofvariableswhichareresponsibleforagivenproblem [23].Ifan
output variable is continuous, CART produces regression trees; if it iscategorical,CARTproducesclassificationtrees.CARTdecisiontreeisa
binary treeandhasabilitytowork onnoisydata.
SVMmapsnonlineardataintoahigherdimensionalspaceinwhich
the data is linearly separable. It uses hyper planes to separate two
classes and the optimal hyperplane is the one that maximizes the
marginbetweentwoclasses [24].Itshighgeneralizationabilitymakes
it tobeusedinmanyfieldsofclassificationsuccessfully.
ANN is a very powerful ML method. It inspires from the working
principleofhumanbrain.Itisacomputerizedsystemthatisdevelopedto produce new information via learning and to realize this abilityautomatically [25]. Producing newinformation or exploring new data
is almost impossible by traditional programming methods. ANN is ap-plied to many topics successfully such as learning, association, clus-
tering,generalizing,FS,andoptimizationbecauseofitspropertieslike
parallelism, fault tolerance, easy adaptation to different fields, low
computationalcost,and self-organization [25].Parameter adjustments of classifiers
BinarytreeestablishedinCARTmethodhadsixlevels,i.e.rootwas
inlevel0andleafswereinlevel6.Sevenphoneticbasedfeatureswere
used and the tree was branched according to these seven features. In
SVM method, the most important issue is to determine the best [c,γ]
pair. For this purpose, we realized a grid search for the best choice of
theseparameters.Theperformanceofclassificationhighlydependson
these parameters. Fig. 3shows the accuracy of classification with re-
specttogamma(γ).AsforANN,thenetworktopologyisdeterminedbytrialanderror.Activationfunctionsinlayers,numberofhiddenlayers,
and the number of neurons in hidden layers must be determined. For
the Parkinson disease diagnosis problem, hundreds of different ex-
periments were performed to determine the best model. The network
topology consisted of single hidden layer with 8 neurons after trials.
Tanh,Relu,andsigmoidactivationfunctionswereusedininput,hidden
and output layers respectively. Optimal epoch number was 150 and
batchsizewas50.Differentoptimizationmethodswerealsoevaluated
for the dataset as given in Table 3and nadam was determined as the
bestoptimizer.
Experimentalresults
FS was performed in this study for the diagnosis of PD via the
phonetic features. There were 22 phonetic features extracted from the
speechsignalsofPDpatientsandthehealthypeople.Thepresentstudy
not only aimed to diagnose PD patients but also to evaluate the per-
formances of FS algorithms on the classification performance. The da-
tasetwasrearrangedtoincludelessnumberofcolumns(features)foran
efficient classification. 7 features were used for CART and 13 features
wereusedforSVMandANNmethods. Table2showsthefeaturesused
inclassifiers.Theexperiments wereperformedusingPython program-
ming language and its libraries Keras, Tensorflow, and sci-kit learn.
Accuracygiveninequation (1)wasusedasperformancemetric.TPin
theequationstandsforthenumberofPDpatientsclassifiedcorrectlyas
having PD, TN means the number of healthy subjects classified cor-
rectly as healthy, FP stands for the number of healthy people mis-
classified as PD patient, and FN is the number of PD patients mis-
classified as healthy. Accuracy is the ratio of the number of correct
assessments to the number of overall assessments [26]. The success of
differentclassifiersbeforeand afterFSareshownin Table4.
Asseenfrom Table4,SVMwithFSshowedthehighestclassification
performance (93.84%) and pure SVM showed the lowest performance(79.98%). By these results it is proven that the determination of the
most relevant features increases the classification performance in ac-
cordance with the literature. RFE method made SVM the most suc-
cessfulclassifierforPDdiagnosiswhileit wastheworstbeforeFS.
Fig.2.Flow chartoftheproposed decisionsupportsystem.
Fig.3.VariationofAccuracywithrespecttoGamma(γ).Z. Karapinar Senturk Medical Hypotheses 138 (2020) 109603
3=+
+ + +AccuracyTN TP
TN TP FN FP(1)
Table5showsabriefsummaryandcomparisonofthestate-of-the-
art. The number of features, the way that the features were obtained,
the classification method, and the accuracies are shown in the table.
AlthoughhighclassificationrateswereobtainedintheliteratureforML
based diagnosis of PD, either they used many features (like [9,14])
whichincreasescomputationtimeortheextractionofthefeatureswere
hardeventheyusefewfeatures.Therefore,indirectly,thecomputation
time is again high. In the proposed approach, computation time was
decreased via less number of effective features, a lightweight feature
extractionprocessandaclassifier.Thefeatureswereobtainedfromthe
speech signals and so to obtain these features is easier and less costly
thantheotherMRI-based [15],motion-based([7,15])andhand-writing
based([18])methodsintheliterature.Althoughsomeauthors(suchas[8,9,12]) used voice features for the diagnosis of PD, they used more
number of features than the proposed approach. Besides using more
features,acostlyFSprocessusedin [10].Theleastnumberoffeatures
were used in [16]with an acceptable classification accuracy, but they
used MRI data for feature extraction and it is harder than obtaining
voice features. [14]used similar number of voice features but theydeterminedthefeaturesbyaheavierFSmethod.Aversionofartificial
bee colony algorithm was utilized to reduce number of features. Also,
theirclassificationmethodhasgreateralgorithmiccomplexitythanthe
proposedapproach.
Discussion
ThepresentstudydevelopedanFSbaseddecisionsupportsystemby
using the features extracted from speech signals of PD patients and
healthy people. Different FS methods were applied to different classi-
fiersand theonewiththehighest performancewas determined.
FS has a strong effect on the performance of the classifier. It is
shownin[20]thatFSisabeneficialpreprocessingtoolanditnotonly
reduces the number of inputs of classifiers, but also helps people un-derstand the underlying causes of diseases. Three FS methods were
evaluatedinthepresentstudyandtheyshoweddifferentperformance
for different classifiers. The best combination of FS method and clas-
sification method was determined and used for the diagnosis of PD.
Table 4shows the effect of FS methods on the classification perfor-
mance. Remarkable results were obtained using FS. It provided about13% performance improvement for SVM, about 11% for ANN, and
about 5% improvement for CART. In addition, classification perfor-
mancealsodependsontheparametersoftheclassifiers.Determination
of the optimal parameters for certain classification method is a key
point.ForSVM,candgammamustbeproperlydetermined.Incaseof
ANN based classification, the topology must be determined properly.
Thatisthenumberofhiddenlayers,thenumberofneuronsinhidden
layers, the activation functions, the parameters like learning rate and
momentumcoefficient,normalizationofdata,epochnumber,etc.must
beinvestigatedindetail.
PD diagnosis system proposed in this study differs from the litera-
tureintermsofFSmethod,alightweightfeatureextractionprocessand
a classifier. A high enough classification performance has been
achieved.UsingvoicefeaturesinthediagnosisofPDhelpedverymuch.Obtainingvoicefeaturesarebotheasierandcheaperwhencomparedto
MRI-basedormotionbaseddiagnosismethods.Inthisstudy,SVMwith
RFE gave the best classification accuracy. These findings suggest that
using certain subset of voice features help researchers classify PD pa-
tients moreaccurately and less effortscan be made to extract featuresTable2
Selectedfeaturesbased onclassifiers.
Classifier FSmethod Determinedfeatures
CART FI Shimmer:APQ3,spread2,D2,Shimmer:APQ5, DFA,RPDE,PPE
SVM,ANN RFE Shimmer:APQ3,spread1,Shimmer:APQ5,RPDE,DFA,spread2,PPE,D2, Jitter:DDPMDVP:APQ,HNR,NHR,MDVP:Shimmer
Table3
Optimization methodsused.
No Optimizer No Optimizer
1 Adam 5 Adagrad
2 Adamx 6 Adadelta
3 Adamax 7 rmsprop
4 Nadam 8 TfOptimizer
Table4Accuracyof classificationbeforeandafter FS.
ClassificationMethod AccuracybeforeFS AccuracyafterFS
CART 85.23% 90.76%
SVM 79.98% 93.84%
ANN 80.25% 91.54%
Table5
Comparisonwiththestate-of-the-art.
Ref.No Numberoffeatures FSmethod Sourceoffeatures Method Accuracy(%)
[8] 28 Correlation Motion-based RF 95
[9] 18 – Voice-based k-NN 94.55
[10] 20 MLP Voice-based LSVM 100%
[11] 10 NIPALS Voice-based ISVR-SOM 0.4656 (MAE)
[12] 23 – Voice-based NN 92.9
[13] 23 FCMFW Voice-based k-NN 97.93
[14] 14 AABC Voice-based KWELM 98.97
[15] 100+ FDR MRI-based SVM 100
[16] 4 – Gaitandtremor-based SVM 92.7
[17] 66 ReliefF Voice-based SVM 91.25
[18] 9 Wrapper Hand-writing NB 91.00
Proposed 13 RFE Voice-based SVM 93.84
Abbreviationsinthetableare:LSVM:LagrangianSupportVectorMachines,RF:RandomForests,k-NN:kNearestNeighbor,AABC:Adaptive
Artificial Bee Colony, OPF: Optimum-Path Forest, ISVR: Incremental Support Vector Regression, KWELM: Kernel-based Weighted ExtremeLearningMachine,MAE:MeanAbsoluteError,NIPALS:Non-lineariterativepartialleastsquares,FCMFW:FuzzyC-MeansFeatureWeighting.Z. Karapinar Senturk Medical Hypotheses 138 (2020) 109603
4from voice signals of candidate PD patients. Besides, the classification
canberealizedbylesscomputationalcost.
Conclusion
In the present study, a FS based decision support system was de-
velopedusingthefeaturesofvoicesignalsofbothPDpatientsandthe
healthy people for the early diagnosis of Parkinson’s. Different FS
methods and different classification methods were used in the experi-
ments. The primary objective in doing so was to improve the perfor-
mance and the accuracy of the model and also to reduce the compu-
tational cost of classification task. Accuracies of the classification
methodswereevaluatedwithandwithoutFSandtheremarkableeffect
of FS was shown. The results indicate that using FS methods together
with classification methods is quite advantageous especially when
dealingwithspeechsignalsinwhichhundredsofphoneticfeaturescan
be obtained. By the help of the developed early diagnosis system, PD
can be diagnosed with a high accuracy rate in its early stages and the
worse symptomsofthediseasecanbestopped.
DeclarationofCompetingInterest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influ-
encethe workreportedinthispaper.
References
[1]KarabudakR.Parkinson’sdisease.2014.
[2]SakarCO,KursunO.TelediagnosisofParkinson’sdiseaseusingmeasurementsof
dysphonia.JMed Syst2010;34(4):591–9.
[3] RayanZ,AlfonseM,Salem A-BM.Machinelearningapproachesinsmarthealth.
ProcediaComputSci2019;154:361–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2019.06.
052.
[4]WanKR,MaszczykT,SeeAAQ,DauwelsJ,KingNKK.Areviewonmicroelectrode
recordingselection offeatures formachinelearningin deepbrainstimulationsur-
geryforParkinson’sdisease. ClinNeurophysiol2019;130(1):145–54.
[5]SalmanpourMR, etal.Optimizedmachinelearningmethods forpredictionof
cognitiveoutcomeinParkinson’sdisease. ComputBiol Med2019;111.
[6]PedrosaTÍ, VasconcelosFF,MedeirosL,SilvaLD.Machinelearningapplicationto
quantifythetremor levelforParkinson’sdiseasepatients.ProcediaComputSci2018;138:215–20.
[7]PrashanthR,Dutta RoyS.NovelandimprovedstageestimationinParkinson’s
diseaseusingclinicalscalesandmachinelearning.Neurocomputing
2018;305:78–103.
[8]CavalloF,MoschettiA,EspositoD,MaremmaniC,RoviniE.Upperlimbmotorpre-clinicalassessmentinParkinson’sdiseaseusingmachinelearning.ParkRelatDisord
2019;63:111–6.
[9]AlmeidaJS,etal.DetectingParkinson’sdiseasewithsustainedphonationand
speechsignalsusingmachine learningtechniques.PatternRecognLett
2019;125:55–62.
[10]ParisiL,RaviChandranN,ManaogML.Feature-drivenmachinelearningtoimprove
earlydiagnosisofParkinson’sdisease.ExpertSystAppl2018;110:182–90.
[11]NilashiM,IbrahimO,AhmadiH,ShahmoradiL,FarahmandM.Ahybridintelligent
systemforthepredictionofParkinson’sDiseaseprogressionusingmachinelearning
techniques.BiocybernBiomedEng2018;38(1):1–15.
[12]DasR.Acomparison ofmultipleclassificationmethodsfordiagnosisof Parkinsondisease. ExpertSystAppl2010;37(2):1568–72.
[13]PolatK.ClassificationofParkinson’sdiseaseusingfeatureweightingmethodonthebasisoffuzzyC-meansclustering.IntJSystSci 2012;43(4):597–609.
[14]WangY, WangAN,AiQ,SunHJ.Anadaptivekernel-basedweightedextreme
learningmachineapproachforeffective detectionofParkinson’sdisease. Biomed
SignalProcessControl2017;38:400–10.
[15]SinghG,VaderaM, SamavedhamL,LimECH.Machinelearning-basedframeworkformulti-class diagnosisof neurodegenerativediseases:astudyon Parkinson’sDisease.IFAC-PapersOnLine2016;49(7):990–5.
[16]AbdulhayE,ArunkumarN,NarasimhanK,VellaiappanE,VenkatramanV.Gaitand
tremor investigationusingmachine learningtechniques forthediagnosisof
Parkinson disease.Fut GenerComputSyst2018;83:366–73.
[17]YamanO,ErtamF,TuncerT.AutomatedParkinson’sdiseaserecognitionbasedonstatisticalpoolingmethodusingacousticfeatures.MedHypotheses2019:109483.
[18]KotsavasiloglouC, KostikisN,Hristu-VarsakelisD,Arnaoutoglou M.Machine
learning-basedclassificationofsimpledrawingmovements inParkinson’sdisease.
BiomedSignalProcessControl2017;31:174–80.
[19] UCImachinelearningrepository:Parkinsonsdataset.[Online].Available: https://
archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/parkinsons.[Accessed: 10-Dec-2019].
[20]Remeseiro B,Bolon-CanedoV.Areviewof featureselection methodsin medical
applications.ComputBiolMed 2019;112.
[21]JainD,Singh V.Featureselectionandclassificationsystemsforchronicdiseaseprediction:areview.EgyptInformJ2018;19(3):179–89.
[22] GuyonI,Weston J,BarnhillS,Vapnik V.Geneselection forcancer classification
usingsupport vectormachines.
[23]YohannesY,WebbP.ClassificationandRegressionTrees,CART:ausermanualfor
identifyingindicatorsofvulnerability tofamineandchronicfoodinsecurity Pap/
Dsk.IntlFoodPolicyResearchInst;1999.
[24]HsuC-W,ChangC-C,LinC-J.Apracticalguidetosupportvectorclassification.
2003.
[25]ÖztemelE. YapaySinirAğları.3rded. İstanbul:PapatyaYayıncılık; 2012.
[26]ZhuW,ZengN,WangN.Sensitivity,specificity,accuracy,associatedconfidence
intervalandROCanalysiswith practicalSAS ®implementations.2010.Z. Karapinar Senturk
Medical Hypotheses 138 (2020) 109603
5