Innovations in Deep Brain Stimulation Methodology
Andrea A. K €uhn, MD, PhD1and Jens Volkmann, MD, PhD2*
1Department of Neurology, Charit /C19e, Berlin, Germany
2Department of Neurology, University Hospital of W €urzburg, W €urzburg, Germany
ABSTRACT: Deep brain stimulation is a powerful
clinical method for movement disorders that no longer
respond satisfactorily to pharmacological management,
but its progress has been hampered by stagnation in tech-nological procedure solutions and device development.
Recently, the combined research efforts of bioengineers,
neuroscientists, and clinicians have helped to betterunderstand the mechanisms of deep brain stimulation,
and solutions for the translational roadblock are emerging.Here, we deﬁne the needs for methodological advances
in deep brain stimulation from a neurophysiological per-
spective and describe technological solutions that are cur-
rently evaluated for near-term clinical application.
VC2016
International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society
Key Words: deep brain stimulation; basal ganglia;
local ﬁeld potentials; oscillations; tremor; Parkinson’sdisease; dystonia
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is an established treat-
ment for severe movement disorders such as Parkin-
son’s disease (PD), tremor, and dystonia, leading to asigniﬁcant reduction in motor deﬁcits in the majority
of patients. However, despite the often striking clinical
beneﬁts, DBS remains a complex and poorly standar-
dized therapy requiring a high level of clinical exper-
tise and involving a multidisciplinary and multistep
procedure, along which treatment failures may occur
because of inappropriate patient selection, misplace-ment of the stimulating electrodes, poor programming,
or inadequate postoperative balancing between stimu-
lation and pharmacological treatment.
1Moreover,
movement disorders are characterized by a highly
variable clinical phenotype and ﬂuctuating symptom
severity (eg, with varying behavioral, pharmacological,
or emotional states), which prompt for an individual-ized and dynamic treatment approach. Hence, research
has focused in recent years, on how a better under-
standing of the pathophysiology of movement disor-
ders and the physiological mechanisms of DBS could
translate into a DBS therapy that can better adapt to
individual patient needs, reduce the need for extensiveclinical programming, and ultimately improve the con-
sistency of patient outcomes.
Unfortunately, very limited technical evolution of
neurostimulation devices has backed clinical success in
movement disorders and rapid expansion to psychiatricindications, epilepsy, or pain. Only recently, with new
competitors in the market, a race for technical device
innovations has started,
2which provides the physician
with more ﬂexible programming options (eg, Vercise;
Boston Scientiﬁc, Valencia, CA) or clinical research
tools (eg, ACTIVA PC 1S, Medtronic; Minneapolis,
MN) allowing the validation of neurophysiological con-
cepts of neurostimulation in clinical practice.
In this review, we will brieﬂy outline the current con-
cepts of DBS mechanisms, deﬁne the needs for transla-
tional advances in DBS methodology, and describe theavailable technical solutions that may soon change our
clinical practice of deep brain stimulation.
DBS Mechanisms and Resulting
Translational Needs
The potential mechanisms behind DBS are varied
and complex, and several hypotheses have been postu-lated over the years.
3-6However, there is little doubt
that DBS modulates pathological activity within cen-
tral neural networks with applied electric ﬁelds andthat a fundamental effect of DBS is the stimulation of
axons around the electrode.
7Although DBS is applied
to brain targets consisting of mixed neural tissue------------------------------------------------------------
*Correspondence to: Jens Volkmann, MD, PhD, FEAN, Chairman and
Professor of Neurology, Department of Neurology, University Hospital ofW€urzburg, Josef-Schneider-Str. 11, D-97080 W €URZBURG, Germany,
E-mail: volkmann_j@ukw.de
Received: 30 March 2016; Revised: 15 May 2016; Accepted: 22 May
2016
Published online 12 July 2016 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI: 10.1002/mds.26703
SPECIAL SERIES: REVIEW
Movement Disorders, Vol. 32, No. 1, 2017 11containing other electrically excitable elements such as
cell bodies, dendrites, or glia, the role of axons seems
paramount because they generate action potentials atthe lowest stimulation threshold.
7-9These stimulation-
induced action potentials are capable of modifying
intrinsic neuronal signals within pathways of func-tional brain networks and possibly “eliminate” or
“mask” pathological network activity.
10
DBS has also offered the unique opportunity to
directly record both multiunit activity and local ﬁeld
potentials (LFPs) from deep brain targets that are other-
wise inaccessible and has helped to better deﬁne thenature of this disease-speciﬁc (or symptom-speciﬁc) net-work activity. New concepts that have emerged from
this research emphasize the role of ﬁring patterns
11
and synchronized oscillatory activity10,12within the
thalamus-cortex basal ganglia (BG)-cortex network.
DBS electrodes are surrounded by thousands of differ-
ent axons, which can project to or from the area ofimplantation or simply pass by on their way to a com-
pletely different brain region. The electric ﬁeld gener-
ated by DBS polarizes all the axons that are sufﬁcientlyclose to the stimulating electrodes, resulting in actionpotentials traveling orthodromically and antidromically
along the axon.
13,14The axonal response to extracellu-
lar electrical stimulation is dictated by 3 fundamentalbiophysical principles: (1) the variable axonal excitabil-
ity with ﬁber diameter, (2) the current-distance relation-
ship, and (3) the strength-duration relationship.
7Based
on theoretical models15,16and experimental evi-
dence,17-19including novel techniques such as optoge-
netics, we are starting to understand which are the
target neurons for a particular DBS indication andwhich neural elements within the stimulation volumerather contribute to adverse effects of stimulation.
For subthalamic stimulation in Parkinson’s disease,
current concepts favor antidromic activation of the
so-called hyperdirect pathway, which consists of axon
collaterals of layer V pyramidal neurons in the motorcortex.
20The remote effect of stimulating these axons
within the subthalamic region may be a change in motor
cortical activity, possibly masking or desynchronizing
pathologically enhanced beta-band oscillations withinthe basal ganglia–thalamocortical network.
18The
goal of therapeutic DBS should be to maximize the
stimulation of these target neurons while minimizingunintended activation of nontarget neurons such as cor-ticospinal or corticobulbar ﬁbers within the internal
capsule, which may cause speech, walking, or ﬁne motor
skill impairments.
21
The great advantage of DBS over stereotactic lesion-
ing is the postoperative adaptability of stimulationparameters, but with new devices offering an evenwider parameter space, this task has become a burden
for clinicians because it relies on clinical experience
and repeated testing of the patient response ratherthan neurophysiologically optimized technical solu-
tions. Historically the settings, which are still used
today, have been dictated by the technical properties
of the available neurostimulation devices and shapedwithin these limits by clinical experience, but theoreti-cal studies based on the biophysics of membrane excit-
ability and the physical properties of the stimulation
pulse have recently proposed numerous opportunitiesof improving device function with the goal of selec-tively stimulating therapeutic target neurons at thelowest energy possible. We want to discuss 5 transla-
tional needs for technological innovation of DBS in
the following paragraphs and outline the emergingsolutions for these needs.
Need 1: Directional Deep Brain Stimulation
Conventional DBS systems use ring-shaped electro-
des, which generate an approximately spherical electri-
cal ﬁeld. In these systems programming of polarity
and stimulation pulse parameters allow only limitedcontrol of the shape of the volume of tissue acti-vated.
22Advanced programming techniques such as
multiple independent current control or interleaving,
which means running 2 programs with different set-tings on the same lead in a temporally alternatingsequence,
23offer additional degrees of freedom in
sculpting the electrical ﬁeld along the longitudinal axis
of a multicontact ring electrode, but do not allow to
direct current within the horizontal plane.
Recently, 2 acute intraoperative studies have proven
the feasibility of horizontal current steering by using
novel lead designs such as segmented or multicontact
electrodes24,25with an external stimulation device.
Directed stimulation using these electrodes resulted inincreased stimulation thresholds for side effects com-
pared with standard spherical stimulation. In particu-
lar, directing current away from the internal capsuledemonstrated an increase in the current threshold forcontractions or dysarthria. The acute intraoperativesetting, however, did not allow evaluating potential
advantages in clinical efﬁcacy when steering current
into the “sweet spot” for motor symptoms of PDwithin the subthalamic area, which has been proposedto be the dorsolateral segment of the STN.
26,27
A few theoretical considerations are important when
moving from a segmented electrode design to a fullyintegrated directional DBS system — the smaller con-tact surface of segmented electrodes compared withring electrodes causes increased electrode impedance
and requires a higher stimulation voltage to pass the
stimulation current. This is likely rendering directedstimulation less energy efﬁcient than stimulation inconventional ring mode. Moreover, with very small
contact sizes such as that planned for the 32-contact
Sapiens-Medtronic lead,
24stimulation of a single con-
tact may well exceed the voltage compliance range ofK€UHN AND VOLKMANN
12 Movement Disorders, Vol. 32, No. 1, 2017
 15318257, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://movementdisorders.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mds.26703 by University Of Waterloo Dana Porter Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
a standard DBS battery. This problem is solved by
stimulating groups of contacts simultaneously to keepthe contact surface within limits. The ﬂexible selection
of these groups of contacts requires an additional elec-
tronic control circuit, a multiplexer, which may beintegrated within the lead.
Because of the greater impact of impedance, a
current-controlled system is preferable to a voltage-controlled pulse generator for segmented electrodes.
When using a single-source stimulation device, the
impedance difference between contacts will passivelydictate the current distribution between multiple
simultaneously active contacts and make directionality
less predictable. Theoretically, a segmented electrodecombined with a neurostimulator providing independ-
ent current sources for each contact would be the opti-
mal combination for reliable current steering.
In September 2015 a novel, fully implantable neuro-
stimulation system (Vercise PC; Boston Scientiﬁc,
Valencia, CA), which combines an 8-contact direc-tional lead and a pulse generator capable of multiple
independent current source control, was introduced to
the market in Europe. Clinical experience with thissystem is still limited, and no published controlled
trial data are available. First evidence from acute
monopolar review data demonstrates the feasibility ofdirectional DBS and the expected changes in therapeu-
tic window with horizontal steering
28(see Fig. 1).
However, future studies need to evaluate if directionalDBS can improve the consistency of good DBS out-comes by compensating for variable lead placementswithin STN.
27
Need 2: Novel Pulse Parameters
A simple way of modifying the charge injection into
the tissue and the selectivity of DBS is a change in theduration of the current pulse. The threshold for activa-tion of neural elements with different membrane excit-ability properties covaries with stimulus strength and
pulse duration and is reﬂected by the nonlinear
strength duration or chronaxie relationship. Usingmeasures of chronaxie, we recently demonstrated thatreducing pulse duration to 30 microseconds or lessmay be beneﬁcial for STN-DBS because it increasesthe therapeutic window and helps to reduce capsularside effects of stimulation without sacriﬁcing stimula-tion efﬁcacy.
29The presumed mechanism supported
by model data is a focusing of the neurostimulationeffect on smaller diameter axons close to the electrodewhile avoiding stimulation of distant pyramidal tractﬁbers when using <60-microsecond pulse durations.
FIG. 1. (a) Modeling of the electrical field and volume of tissue activated generated by bipolar stimulation between contacts K2 (anode) and K5
(cathode) of a directional DBS lead (Boston Scientific Vercise). The gradient of the E-field is visualized by white arrows. The red area visualizes th e
volume of activated tissue. The model was created using the Lead-DBS toolbox37(http://www.lead-dbs.org; image courtesy of Dr. Andreas Horn).
(b) An MRI/CT fusion displays the location of the electrode in the STN. A schematic drawing on the right displays the orientation of the segmented
contacts. A monopolar review was conducted with current steering in 60-degree rotations to determine thresholds (in mA) for complete rigidity
reduction and first capsular adverse effects (contraction of contralateral mouth). The clinical effect thresholds were then transferred into a pol ar plot
to outline the current steering effects in 6 main directions. The green line connects the efficacy thresholds and the red line the adverse effect thres h-
olds. The green area denotes the therapeutic window. Note the expanded therapeutic window when directing current in anterior and medial direc-tions in this case. [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]INNOVATIONS IN DBS METHODOLOGY
Movement Disorders, Vol. 32, No. 1, 2017 13
 15318257, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://movementdisorders.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mds.26703 by University Of Waterloo Dana Porter Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Experimental data also suggest a potential beneﬁt of
shorter pulse durations for tolerance development and
stimulation-induced ataxia in patients with thalamicdeep brain stimulation for essential tremor,
30but clini-
cal studies are still pending.
Computational models suggest that changing the
pulse waveform from a standard rectangular shapemay offer another opportunity of improving the efﬁ-ciency of DBS.
31-33Exploring the vast parameter space
of pulse parameters in clinical proof-of-concept studies
is an urgent need in DBS research.
Need 3: Computational Models
of Deep Brain Stimulation
Several groups have developed computational models
to predict the electrical ﬁeld and volume of neural tissue
activation by DBS as a function of the stimulation
parameter settings.34-36Recently, these DBS modeling
efforts have focused on the integration of imagingdata
37and ﬁnite element models of the DBS electric ﬁeld
to make patient-speciﬁc predictions on the neural
response to DBS.38The results are then imbedded in a
3-D graphical user interface that can run on a personalcomputer and assist the physician in preselecting DBSparameter settings based on a visualization of the
patient-speciﬁc volume of tissue activated. One study
has compared clinical outcomes generated by model-deﬁned versus clinically deﬁned stimulation parametersettings and found equal efﬁcacy but a tendency for
physicians to chronically overstimulate the STN based
on monopolar review data, thus causing mild cognitiveadverse effects.
39This interesting observation needs to
be conﬁrmed in further clinical studies when visual pro-
gramming tools become commercially available in the
near future. In general, such tools are needed to reducethe programming burden of clinicians, in particular,with the introduction of directional DBS and pulse gen-erators that offer a wider parameter space than conven-
tional DBS systems. Moreover, computational models
allow the creation of testable hypotheses about opti-mized ways of stimulating neural tissue and could pro-vide valuable input into the engineering of next-
generation DBS systems.
40
Need 4: Identiﬁcation of Symptom-
or Disease-Speciﬁc Physiomarkers
Physiological markers of particular brain states are
necessary to control adaptive neurostimulation devices,which sense pathological activity and only act when
needed. This approach is straightforward in epilepsy,
for which a ﬁrst commercial system is available. More-over, these biosignals could be used to identify effectivecontact combinations in future autoprogramming algo-
rithms for multisegmented leads. For movement disor-
ders physiomarkers have emerged from research usingthe implanted DBS electrodes by externalized leads torecord LFPs and from subdural electrodes recording
cortical activity (Crowell et al, 2012).
LFP Signals Related to Hypokinesia
A multitude of studies have demonstrated enhanced
beta-band activity ( /C2420 Hz) in LFP recordings from the
basal ganglia of patients with Parkinson’s disease (PD)withdrawn from dopaminergic medication.
41-43Ele-
vated beta power has been associated with bradykinesiaand rigidity in PD, as it is decreased with dopaminergictreatment,
42,44,45and its reduction correlates with clini-
cal improvement in motor symptoms induced by levo-
dopa46-48and DBS.49,50New-generation bidirectional
devices with sensing function (PC 1S, Medtronic) allow
monitoring of the neuronal signal in chronicallyimplanted patients and thus probe beta power as a reli-able biomarker for adaptive DBS (aDBS; see Fig. 2).
51-53
In addition to beta power, other more complex con-
trol signals should be considered for aDBS in PD. Tak-ing into account the temporal evolution of beta activity,studies have focused on time-variant spectral properties,spatial extent of beta-band synchronization, and long-range temporal correlations in the envelope of beta-
band amplitude oscillations, revealing additional evi-
dence for a correlation of beta oscillations and clinicalstate in PD.
54-56Further, high-frequency oscillations
(HFOs) recorded from the STN in PD patients in therange of 200-350 Hz are modulated with levodopa
57;
beta-HFO phase-amplitude coupling (PAC) within theSTN correlates with motor impairment,
58and beta-
HFO PAC is reduced with levodopa treatment in paral-lel with clinical improvement.
59More recently, patho-
logically enhanced coupling between beta-phase andhigh-gamma amplitude in the motor cortex has beendescribed in PD using cortical electrodes, suggestingabnormal phase-amplitude interaction in the cortico-subthalamic network
60that is reduced during DBS
along with clinical improvement.61
LFP Signals Related to Hyperkinesia
Recordings from the BG of patients with dystonia are
characterized by increased low-frequency (5-12 Hz,
theta-alpha) activity,44,62-64irrespective of the target
area of deep brain stimulation.65In dystonia, low-
frequency activity is coherent with dystonic EMGactivity, especially driving phasic EMG bursts.
62-67A
combined magnetoencephalography pallidal LFP studyshowed cortico-subcortical coherence in low-frequencyactivity between the cerebellum and pallidum thatcorrelated with the severity of motor symptoms,
64and
DBS is known to suppress pallidal low-frequency activ-ity in patients with predominantly phasic dystonicmovements.
68Similarly, low frequency activity was sup-
pressed by geste antagoniste in a patient with cervicaldystonia.
69Other hyperkinetic movements such as
levodopa-induced dyskinesia, myoclonus, motor tics,K€UHN AND VOLKMANN
14 Movement Disorders, Vol. 32, No. 1, 2017
 15318257, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://movementdisorders.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mds.26703 by University Of Waterloo Dana Porter Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
and hyperkinesia in Huntington’s disease patients have
been associated with enhanced theta-alpha activity in
the BG70-74and/or thalamus,75,76supporting a link
between mobile hyperkinesia and enhanced theta-alphaactivity. In addition, in PD patients increased gammaband activity (60-90 Hz) occurs with levodopa-induced
dyskinesia along with a reduction in beta-band
activity.
70,73,77,78
Tremor-Related Signals
Levodopa-induced modulation in STN LFP beta
activity does not correlate with tremor suppression inPD,
46but periods of tremor have been related to
reduced beta power in the cortex and STN.79Con-
versely, low gamma-band suppression was observed
during DBS-induced tremor reduction.80Speciﬁc
tremor-associated activity has been detected in thetremor network in PD patients using invasive and non-
invasive recordings,
81showing coupling to EMG at
single and double tremor frequencies.82-84These ﬁnd-
ings suggest a direct relationship between the synchro-nization of cerebral oscillations and tremor
manifestation, which would allow feedback-controlled
stimulation techniques based on phase cancellation.
85
Need 5: Novel Stimulation Patterns Selectively
Suppressing Disease-Speciﬁc Brain Activity
The concept of adaptive stimulation is based on
feedback-controlled stimulation, in which the stimula-
tion is either discontinued or adjusted in amplitude in
relation to a continuously sensed biosignal that isindicative of the current clinical state. These feedback
signals could involve either direct sensing of the clini-
cal symptom such as tremor using accelerometer orrecording of surrogate neuronal activity.
Closed-Loop Neurostimulation
One proposed mechanism of continuous high-
frequency DBS is the suppression of abnormallysynchronized oscillatory activity within the motor cor-
tico–basal ganglia network.
10Even though suppression
is highest at those contacts with the largest amount of
abnormal oscillatory activity,49,86suppression of other
frequencies that might be more relevant for informa-
tion coding (such as gamma-band activity)87,88cannot
be excluded and may account for DBS-induced sideeffects like deﬁcits in verbal ﬂuency
89or motor slow-
ing.90,91aDBS using signals that reﬂect the individual
modulation of motor symptoms over time will allowstopping stimulation during asymptomatic periods.
Closed-loop stimulation has been probed by only a
few groups using different techniques for feedbackcontrol so far. First, in nonhuman primates Rosin and
colleagues recorded neuronal spike activity from the
ipsilateral primary motor cortex to trigger pallidalDBS, providing the ﬁrst evidence for successful
aDBS.
92Efﬁcacious reduction in bradykinesia with
aDBS was obtained with an 80-millisecond delaybetween the cortical spike activity and pallidal high-
frequency stimulation, possibly because of phase inter-
ference of aDBS with abnormal network activity. Atrigger in the DBS target area might be more suitable
for surgical approach, and population activity might
be a more stable biosignal.
In their landmark article,
93Little et al described the
ﬁrst application of unilateral aDBS in 8 PD patients
under laboratory conditions. Here, Peter Brown’sgroup has taken the results from a multitude of previ-
ous studies to the next level, closing the loop for DBS
by using local STN beta-band activity as a feedbacksignal for adaptive stimulation. Speciﬁcally, ﬁltered
STN beta activity is tracked online, and an individual
threshold is set for each patient triggering aDBS. Sur-prisingly, unilateral aDBS was even more effective, by
27%, than conventional chronic unilateral stimulation,
and at the same time, stimulation time was reduced by56%. One additional interesting aspect was the pro-
gressive reduction in stimulation time with aDBS over
the 10-minute cycle, suggesting adaptive network
FIG. 2. Raw signal of local field potentials recorded with the ACTIVA PC 1S system with and without medication off DBS 8 months after DBS sur-
gery. Note that beta oscillation are consistently present also after long-term DBS and are suppressed by levodopa.INNOVATIONS IN DBS METHODOLOGY
Movement Disorders, Vol. 32, No. 1, 2017 15
 15318257, 2017, 1, Downloaded from https://movementdisorders.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mds.26703 by University Of Waterloo Dana Porter Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
