PAPER
Chronic deep brain stimulation for the treatment of tremor in
multiple sclerosis: review and case reports
H A Wishart, D W Roberts, R M Roth, B C McDonald, D J Coffey, A C Mamourian, C Hartley,
L A Flashman, C E Fadul, A J Saykin
.............................................................................................................................. .
See end of article for
authors’ affiliations
.......................
Correspondence to:
Dr H A Wishart,
Department of Psychiatry,
Dartmouth Medical
School, Dartmouth-
Hitchcock Medical Center,Lebanon, New Hampshire
03756-0001, USA;
heather.wishart@dartmouth.edu
.......................J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2003; 74:1392–1397
Background: Deep brain stimulation (DBS) offers a non-ablative alternative to thalamotomy for the
surgical treatment of medically refractory tremor in multiple sclerosis. However, relatively few outcomes
have been reported.
Objective: To provide a systematic review of the published cases of DBS use in multiple sclerosis and to
present four additional patients.Methods: Quantitative and qualitative review of the published reports and description of a case series from
one centre.
Results: In the majority of reported cases (n = 75), the surgical target for DBS implantation was the
ventrointeromedial nucleus of the thalamus. Tremor reduction and improvement in daily functioning were
achieved in most patients, with 87.7% experiencing at least some sustained improvement in tremor control
postsurgery. Effects on daily functioning were less consistently assessed across studies; in papers reporting
relevant data, 76.0% of patients experienced improvement in daily functioning. Adverse effects weresimilar to those reported for DBS in other patient populations.
Conclusions: Few of the studies reviewed used highly standardised quantitative outcome measures, and
follow up periods were generally one year or less. Nonetheless, the data suggest that chronic DBS often
produces improved tremor control in multiple sclerosis. Complete cessation of tremor is not necessarily
achieved, there are cases in which tremor control decreases over time, and frequent reprogrammingappears to be necessary.
Multiple sclerosis can be associated with tremor in the
arms, legs, trunk, and head, although the upper
extremities are most commonly affected.12In a recent
study of 100 outpatients with definite multiple sclerosis,
action tremor was detected on neurological examination in
58 cases, while in contrast to some previous reports, rest and
rubral tremors were not observed.1The action tremor of
multiple sclerosis can have postural or kinetic components
(including intention), and may affect the more proximal or
more distal forearm.1–3In general, tremor associated with
multiple sclerosis is thought to be related to dysfunction of
the cerebellum or its connections, though further research is
needed to explore its pathophysiology fully.1
Medical treatment of tremor in multiple sclerosis is often
less than satisfactory12and ablative thalamotomy, while
effective in selected patients,4may not produce sustained
benefit.56Chronic deep brain stimulation (DBS) through
implanted electrodes provides an alternative. Given thesuccess of DBS in the treatment of Parkinson’s disease and
essential tremor, this procedure has also been used in
multiple sclerosis. In this paper we present a review of the
published reports on this subject, as well as a case series of
individuals who received bilateral implantation at our centre.
METHODS
Papers for the literature review were located using relevant
keywords (deep brain stimulation, neurostimulation, thala-
mic stimulation, multiple sclerosis) and associated search
terms in Ovid Medline 1966 to 2002, and by searching the
reference list of each article recovered. This strategy yielded
14 full reports of DBS in multiple sclerosis, all of which
contained data relevant to the review (table 1). All studies
were modest in size, ranging from one to 14 patients. Acrossall studies, the total number of patients who received
completed DBS implantation was 75; in some cases,additional patients were initially studied, but DBS implanta-tion was not completed for various reasons (see Results). Insome studies, the patients with multiple sclerosis were part ofa larger sample composed mainly of individuals withParkinson’s disease or essential tremor. Follow up periodsranged from less than three months to more than 12 months,with most studies (n = 7) in the 6 to 12 month range. Eachstudy was reviewed for selection criteria, surgical target, andprimary outcome variables, including tremor suppression,improvement in daily functioning, and adverse effects.
For the purpose of this review, tremor suppression was
defined according to the percentage of patients showingsustained improvement (to the end of the study period), toany degree and on any type of tremor scale or tremormeasurement device. Improvement in daily functioning wasdefined according to the percentage of patients showingsustained improvement in functions such as feeding, holdingand manipulating household objects, and quality of life. Forthe most part, reports of improvement in daily functioningwere based on patient self report, while improvement intremor control was based on paper and pencil testing, tremor
amplitude scales, or tremor measurement devices. Also
included in this report are original data from the completeconsecutive series (n = 4) of multiple sclerosis patients whohave received DBS implantation at our hospital.
RESULTS
Review of previously published data
Inclusion criteria and sample characteristics
Six studies reported explicit criteria for selecting patients forDBS surgery (Montgomery et al,
3Hooper et al,17Benabid et al,101392
www.jnnp.com group.bmj.com  on July 3, 2014 - Published by jnnp.bmj.com Downloaded from Table 1 Studies describing chronic deep brain stimulation in multiple sclerosis
Study [ref] n *Inclusion criteria/
sample characteristics Locus Follow up Adverse effectsTremorsuppression /C192Effect on dailyfunctions `
Brice andMcLellan, 1980
72 Severe disabling tremor;
sensation, power, fingermovements relatively
well preserved; clinically stable
for 6 months;failure to respond to
drug treatmentBilateral
subthalamic5–6 months Not reported separately 100% 100%
Nguyen andDegos, 1993
81 Severe tremor Unilateral
VIM17 months None reported 100% 100%
Seigfried andLippitz, 1994
919 Not reported Unilateral
VIMNot reported None 78% Not reported
Benabid et al,
1996104 Severe tremor; failure to
respond to drug treatmentVIM 3 to>6
monthsMicrohaematoma (1 MSpatient); no other persistenteffects; transitory effects not
separately reported for MS
subsample50% Not reportedseparately
Geny et al,
1996
11/C24413 Disabling tremor; no
relapse within preceding6 monthsUnilateral
VIM3 months Transitory paresis in lower
limb (1 case); dysaesthesiae
of,1 min at onset of
stimulation (all cases);asthenia (1 case)69% 92%
Whittle et al,
1998
125 Disabling UE movement
disorder; absence ofpredominantly posturalaxial tremor or severe
neurological dysfunction;
ability to locate an
effective surgical targetVentrolateralthalamusNot reported Mood disturbances in some Benefit in some
or all patients;
no detailed reportNot reported
Hay, 1999
131 Not specifically reported
(single case study)Unilateralthalamus2 months None reported 100% Not reported
Montgomery et al,
1999
314 Disabling UE tremor
without other weakness,sensory, or other
problems that would
continue to limitfunctioning; clinically
stable for 6 months;
no significant speech
or swallowing problems;
no severe cognitivedisabilityVIM ,3212+months Intracerebral haematoma
(1 case); transientparaesthesiae when
stimulator turned on
(most cases)100% Not reported
Schulder et al,
1999
25 Disabling UE tremor;
failure to respond todrug treatmentUnilateralVIM>6 months None 100% 60%
Taha et al,
1999
14**2 Bilateral limb tremor,
head tremor, or voice
tremorVIM ,10 months Not reported separately
for MS patients; nohaemorrhage or infarction100% Not reported
Schuurman et al,
2000
155 Severe UE tremor present
at least one year despitedrug treatment; age 18
or older; no significantcognitive dysfunction;
no contraindications to
surgery; no advancedcerebral atrophy; no
previous thalamotomyUnilateral
or Bilateral
VIM6 months Dysarthria, gait/balance
disturbance, arm ataxia(3 patients); intracerebral
haemorrhage (1 case ofentire larger sample)Generalimprovement,
not individually
reportedNo significantoverall
improvement;
notindividually
reported
Matsumoto et al,
2001
163 Severe UE tremor;
clinically definite MS;
no significant weaknessor sensory loss in the
hands; absence of arrhythmic
movement disorder; clinicallystable
for preceding 3 months;
no dementiaUnilateral
VIM12 months None 100% 0%
Hooper et al,
2002
17 5/C192/C19210 Disabling UE tremor for at
least 12 months that had
not responded to drug
treatment; established
diagnosis of MS; no majorrelapse for 6 months; no
severe sensory or motor
impairment that would
continue to limit functioning;
capacity to give informedconsentUnilateralthalamus12 months Upper limb paraesthesiae
when the DBS was turnedon; transitory limb
weakness (2 cases),
infection at site of IPGnecessitating its removal
(1 case); intraoperative
hypoxic episode (1 case);
small thalamocapsular
haemorrhages at site of DBSimplantation with persistent
changes in functioning
(2 cases); seizures (2 cases,1 seizure each)100% 68 to 78%were same orbetter
at 12 months
ontwo scales;
other
measures
showed
no effectDeep brain stimulation for tremor in multiple sclerosis 1393
www.jnnp.com group.bmj.com  on July 3, 2014 - Published by jnnp.bmj.com Downloaded from Whittle et al,12Schurrman et al,15Matsumoto et al,16), while
the others generally provided sample or case descriptions
(table 1). Inclusion criteria or sample characteristics includedsevere or disabling tremor in 11 of the 14 studies. Other
relatively common factors were failure to respond to medical
treatment (five studies), absence of other severe sensory ormotor problems that would continue to limit functioningeven if tremor were alleviated (five studies), clinically stabledisease for three to six months before surgery (five studies),
and relatively preserved cognitive function (four studies).
Additional specific factors are listed in table 1. Otherinvestigators may have used these or other inclusion/exclusion criteria, but did not describe them in their reports.Most studies did not specify the numbers of patients who
were considered but rejected for surgery, possibly because
selection had begun earlier in the referral process, before thestudy authors had contact with the patients. An exception isthe study by Whittle et al,
12in which it was reported that 12 of
17 patients referred for surgery did not complete the
procedure because they did not meet inclusion criteria(table 1). Another is the study by Matsumoto et al ,
16in
which seven of 16 patients referred for surgery did not havethe procedure, including two who met inclusion criteria but
declined the surgery, four who were denied insurance
coverage, and one whose movement disorder was ultimatelydeemed to be ataxia. Of note, the remaining patients in theMatsumoto study received either thalamotomy (n = 6) orDBS (n = 3) but the results were reported for the most part
considering both groups together.
Surgical procedures
The surgical target for DBS implantation was the ventroin-
teromedial nucleus of the thalamus (VIM) in the majority ofstudies (table 1). Alusi et al noted that the nucleus ventralis
oralis posterior rather than the VIM has also been chosen bysome as a preferred target for DBS implantation in multiplesclerosis.
4Most groups reported detailed intraoperative
stimulation and recording procedures for refining the
ultimate location of implantation, based on maximising
tremor suppression while minimising adverse effects. Geny
and colleagues observed that the effective VIM site inmultiple sclerosis is often dorsal and lateral to the VIM sitethat is effective in Parkinson’s disease, and that the exactlocation of the stimulator within the VIM must be selected
with attention to the somatotopic distribution within the
nucleus.
11Nguyen and Degos found that stimulation of theupper VIM region was most effective in controlling proximal
tremor, while stimulation of the lower part of the VIM was
most effective in controlling distal tremor.8In most cases,
stimulator implantation was unilateral, but bilateral implan-
tations (either staged or simultaneous) and implantations
contralateral to a previous thalamotomy were also reported.
In a small number of studies, chronic implantation of DBS
was intended but not completed at the time of surgery.
Reasons for failure to proceed to implantation included
complications during surgery (one of 15 cases in the
Montgomery series3); failure to locate an effective target
(three of eight patients who otherwise met inclusion criteriain the Whittle series
12; three of 15 cases in the Hooper
series5); and a positive benefit of microelectrode insertion
alone (two of 15 cases in the Hooper series17).
Tremor suppression and daily functioning
Tremor reduction and improvement in daily functioning were
achieved in the majority of cases (table 1). Twelve of the 14
studies reported sufficient data to determine the percentage
of patients experiencing improved tremor control. Those 12
studies involved a total of 65 patients, of whom 57 (88%)
experienced sustained improvement in tremor control post-
surgery. Effects on daily functioning were less consistently
assessed across studies, with only six studies reporting
sufficient data to determine effects in this domain. These
six studies involved 25 patients, of whom 19 (76%)
experienced improvement in daily functioning. Although
data on frequency of reprogramming were not generally
reported in detail in these studies, it appeared that
reprogramming was required relatively often to maintain
optimal tremor control while minimising undesired side
effects.
Adverse effects
Across all 14 studies, intracerebral haemorrhage occurred in
four or possibly five patients.31 01 51 7One was a microhaema-
toma, the effects of which resolved within three months.10In
the case of Montgomery et al ,3the haematoma was
attributable to the surgery rather than to the stimulator
(which was never placed), and the patient also experienced
tremor reduction and transient dysarthria. Two cases
involved small thalamocapsular haemorrhages at the site of
DBS implantation which led to persistent changes in
functioning.17In another study, which included patients
with various tremor aetiologies, there was relatively littleStudy [ref] n *Inclusion criteria/
sample characteristics Locus Follow up Adverse effectsTremorsuppression /C192Effect on dailyfunctions `
Nandi et al,
2002
181 Severe, disabling,
progressively worseningUE tremor; gait
dysfunction with leg ataxia
(single case study)Unilateralzona incerta12 months Worsening of walking and
left foot dystonia developedbetween approximately
months 9 and 12100% 100%
*Number of patients with multiple sclerosis in whom implantation of a chronic stimulator was completed.
/C192As measured by the percentage of patients showing any sustained improvement (to the end of the follow up period in study) to any degree on any type of tremor
scale or instrumentation.`As measured by the percentage of patients showing sustained improvement in daily functions such as feeding, holding and manipulating household objects, or
subjective quality of life in everyday contexts.
1One patient with multiple sclerosis had bilateral stimulators; data available are for unilateral stimulation (first side).
/C244Additional clinical follow up data available. Tremor suppression data are for proximal upper extremity tremor; additional less consistent improvement occurred in
distal upper extremity and some improvement occurred in those with lower extremity tremor.
**Mean follow up period was 10 months for the entire sample, including six patients with Parkinson’s disease, 15 with essential tremor, and two with multiple
sclerosis; the follow up period for the two patients with multiple sclerosis was not reported separately. In the entire sample, 19 patients underwent either staged or
simultaneous VIM implantation, while four received thalamotomy followed by unilateral VIM implantation; it is unclear whether either of the patients with multiplesclerosis was among the minority receiving the combination of thalamotomy and DBS.
/C192/C192Specific targets within the thalamus were 1 mm posterior to AC-PC midpoint and from 11–15 mm lateral to midline, adjusted in 2 mm increments to the locus
where stimulation produced tremor suppression without adverse neurophysiological effects.
MS, multiple sclerosis; UE, upper extremity; VIM, ventrointeromedial nucleus of the thalamus.Table 1 Continued1394 Wishart, Roberts, Roth, et al
www.jnnp.com group.bmj.com  on July 3, 2014 - Published by jnnp.bmj.com Downloaded from detail about the haemorrhage and it was unclear whether
or not it was a patient with multiple sclerosis who was
affected.15
In the entire sample of 75 patients in whom DBS
implantation was completed, one developed a recurrent
infection at the site of the internal pulse generator, which
necessitated removal of the unit17; and two had seizures, one
at one week postsurgery and the other at eight weeks.17
Paraesthesiae at the onset of stimulation were relatively
common across studies, but tended to be brief and mild.
Other adverse effects were generally mild and in some cases
transitory, and included dysarthria, disequilibrium, and limb
weakness.
Six studies reported data on the presence or absence of
exacerbations of multiple sclerosis after surgery (table 2).
These studies involved 38 patients, of whom six or seven(16–18%) had an exacerbation within the follow up
period. Only three of those exacerbations occurred within a
month of surgery. Given variable presurgical baselines and
postoperative follow up periods across studies, it was unclear
whether this represented a significant change from thepatients’ baseline status. Only three studies (involving 18
patients) reported sufficient data to allow calculation of
annualised per patient exacerbation rates before and aftersurgery.
71 11 6All three of these studies gave a baseline
exacerbation rate of zero (because recent exacerbation was
an exclusion factor for surgery). Postoperatively, the annualisedexacerbation rate was 0.17 per patient in these three
studies.
Dartmouth-Hitchcock case series
Table 3 presents the data for the small consecutive series of
patients with multiple sclerosis who have received DBSsurgery for treatment of drug refractory tremor at ourmedical centre. This sample is distinct in that all patientshad bilateral stimulator implantation (either staged orsimultaneous). In addition, the follow up period from initialsurgery averaged approximately 22 months, somewhat longerthan many of the reports published to date. The surgicaltarget was the ventrolateral thalamus in all cases, with theultimate placement being determined on the basis ofintraoperative response. One additional patient had a seizureintraoperatively, so implantation was not completed; thatpatient remains a potential candidate for surgery at a futuredate. The four remaining patients all experienced a signifi-cant improvement in tremor control postsurgery, and in eachcase better tremor control translated into improvements inaspects of daily functioning. However, reprogramming wasneeded to maintain optimal tremor control, and even so, thedegree of control was not necessarily equal for left andright extremities. In addition, tremor control on at leastone side clearly declined over time in three cases, thoughall patients still functioned above their presurgical baselines.One patient reported the sudden onset of unpleasant
Table 2 Exacerbations of multiple sclerosis before and after surgery
Study [ref] nExacerbation-free
baseline (months)Follow up period for
exacerbation data
(months)Postoperativeexacerbations Comments
Brice andMcLellan,
1980
72 6 months 5–6 months 0 No changes in clinical status
consistent with relapseoccurred
Geny et al,
1996
1113 6 months 12 months 3 Three patients had a relapse
of their MS at 4, 6, and 12months postsurgery,
respectively; no change in
average EDSS for the group
Montgomery
et al,1 9 9 9
314 6 months ,3–12 +months 1 One patient had an
exacerbation 3 days
postsurgery, at the time of aUTI. This decreased the
patient’s lower extremity
power and necessitated
increased use of a wheelchair
Schulder et al,
1999
25 Not specified >6 months 2 Two patients had an
exacerbation within onemonth of surgery; both
responded to high doseintravenous steroids. In one,
new brain stem lesions were
evident on MRI but not nearthe site of the electrode. No
change in individuals’ EDSS
scores
Matsumotoet al,2 0 0 1
163 3 months 12 months 0 No exacerbations
Nandi et al,
2002181 Not specified; had
progressive worseningof tremor in the 6months before surgery12 months ? The patient experienced
progressive worsening of
walking, and left foot dystoniadeveloped between
approximately 9 and 12
months post-surgery. It is
unclear whether this
represented a discrete relapseor continuation of the
progression that was evident
before surgery
In general, the papers did not give specific criteria for exacerbation, but did provide clinical descriptions(summarised here).EDSS, expanded disability status scale; MS, multiple sclerosis; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; UTI, urinary tract
infection.Deep brain stimulation for tremor in multiple sclerosis 1395
www.jnnp.com group.bmj.com  on July 3, 2014 - Published by jnnp.bmj.com Downloaded from paraesthesiae, dizziness, and nausea 15 months after an
otherwise beneficial implantation. Although it was not
possible to detect the source of the problem, the unit
was removed at the patient’s request and her complaints
resolved.
DISCUSSION
Deep brain stimulation offers a non-ablative alternative tothalamotomy for the surgical treatment of drug refractory
tremor. Relatively few studies of outcome with this procedure
have been reported in multiple sclerosis. The studies pub-
lished to date involve a total of 75 completed implantations,
and this report describes four additional cases. The compileddata suggest that chronic DBS often produces sustained
improvement in tremor control in multiple sclerosis, as
measured by tremor scales and self report instruments, for
follow up periods of several months to a year. Nevertheless,
these studies also show that complete cessation of tremor is
not necessarily achieved, that there are cases in which tremor
control decreases over time, and that frequent reprogram-
ming appears to be necessary. Furthermore, the only directcomparison (to our knowledge) of DBS and ablative surgery
in patients with multiple sclerosis showed no clear advantageof one method over the other, though the case sample was
only a relatively small subset of a larger mixed sample in that
study.
15
Although patient selection criteria were not explicitly
described in all studies, the more commonly used indicationsfor surgery appeared to be severe or disabling tremor, failureto respond to medical treatment, absence of other severesensory or motor problems that would continue to limit
functioning even if tremor were alleviated, clinically stable
disease for three to six months before surgery, and relativelypreserved cognitive function.
Outcomes assessment—in terms of tremor measurement
and effects on daily activities—could be improved in futurestudies of DBS in multiple sclerosis. Matsumoto and
colleagues provide a review of considerations and options
for measuring tremor suppression and the practical effects ofDBS surgery in multiple sclerosis.
16They present a clinical
tremor rating scale, a novel quantitative movement analysis
technique, and a box-and-blocks test of prehensile functionTable 3 Dartmouth-Hitchcock case series
PatientPatient description
(age/sex/disease
duration *)Duration offollow upAnnualised
reprogramming
frequencyFinal DBSsettings /C192 Tremor rating `Tremorsuppression:
description oflongitudinal
findings Adverse effects
1 50/M/10 20 months 2.9 R stimulator:
3.5/90/160/B;
L stimulator:2.5/90/130/MLUE: 3/1; RUE: 3/1 Initial cessation of LUE
tremor and significantdecrease in RUE tremor.Effectiveness declined
over time, though
status is still
improved relative
to baseline withoptimal programmingTransient
episode of RUE
weakness;transient
episode of
diplopia; no MS
exacerbations
2 49/F/10 15 months
for first
implant;
3 months
for secondimplant5.6 R stimulator:never turnedon; L stimulator:
1.5/60/90/BLUE: 3/na; RUE: 3/0
(3/1when stimulatorturned off)Improved, most notablyin the RUE; however,left stimulator was
ultimately removed
(see text). Initial benefitfrom surgery alone for
right stimulator, which
was never turned on.
Progression of LUE tremor
occurred over time;final tremor rating was
unavailable as the
patient did notreturn to clinicTransient painand swellingaround
insertion site
initially;transient
paraesthesiae,
relieved by
temporarily
turning off thestimulator; no
MS
exacerbations
3 37/F/2 31 months
for 1
st
implant;30 monthsfor 2
nd
implant3.1 R stimulator:4.8/120/
145/M;
L stimulator:1.8/60/135/MLUE: 3/1; RUE: 3/1 Improved; no significant
decline in benefit with
optimal programmingDysarthria 1;
oneexacerbation 4
weeks aftersecond implant
4 50/F/14 21 months 3.4 R stimulator:
3.3/120/
130/B; L
stimulator:3.0/120/
145/BLUE: 3/0; RUE: 3/0 Significant bilateral
improvement initially;eventually had
return of bilateralmoderate to wide
amplitude tremor (LUE
worse than RUE), though
status is still improved
relative to baseline withoptimal programmingNo adverseeffects; no MS
exacerbations
Postoperative magnetic resonance imaging revealed no evidence of intraoperative haemorrhage. One additional patient had an intraoperative seizure so
implantation was not completed at that time. Exacerbation was defined as the emergence of a new clinical symptom or reappearance of a previous sympto mo f
multiple sclerosis.
20
*Age (at time of surgery, years), sex (M, male; F, female), disease duration (years from diagnosis to surgery).
/C192Voltage/pulse width/frequency/monopolar (M) or bipolar (B).
`Tremor rating (baseline/postoperative): 0, absent; 1, mild; 2, moderate; 3, severe. Postoperative ratings were made one month after surgery with stimulator
turned on, unless otherwise specified.
1Reprogramming led to an acceptable balance between tremor control and dysarthria.
L, left; LUE, left upper extremity; MS, multiple sclerosis; R, right; RUE, right upper extremity.1396 Wishart, Roberts, Roth, et al
www.jnnp.com group.bmj.com  on July 3, 2014 - Published by jnnp.bmj.com Downloaded from 