Deep Brain Stimulation: Neuropsychological and
Neuropsychiatric Issues
Valerie Voon, MD,1,2*Cynthia Kubu, PhD,3Paul Krack, MD,4Jean-Luc Houeto, MD,5
and Alexander I. Tro ¨ster, PhD6
1Department of Psychiatry, Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto, Canada
2Human Motor Control Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA
3Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio, USA
4Department of Neurology and INSERM U 318, University of Grenoble, Grenoble, France
5Department of Neurology, Poitiers University Hospital, Poitiers, France
6Department of Neurology, University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA
Abstract: Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative
disorder characterized by motor, cognitive, neuropsychiatric,autonomic, and other nonmotor symptoms. The efﬁcacy ofdeep brain stimulation (DBS) for the motor symptoms of ad-vanced PD is well established. However, the effects of DBS on
the cognitive and neuropsychiatric symptoms are less clear.
The neuropsychiatric aspects of DBS for PD have recently beenof considerable clinical and pathophysiological interest. As acompanion to the preoperative and postoperative sections of theDBS consensus articles, this article reviews the published lit-erature on the cognitive and neuropsychiatric aspects of DBS
for PD. The majority of the observed neuropsychiatric symp-
toms are transient, treatable, and potentially preventable. Out-
come studies, methodological issues, pathophysiology, andpreoperative and postoperative management of the cognitive
and neuropsychiatric aspects and complications of DBS for PD
are discussed. © 2006 Movement Disorder Society
Key words: Parkinson’s disease; deep brain stimulation;
depression; cognition; subthalamic
A range of neuropsychiatric symptoms have been in-
creasingly recognized in Parkinson’s disease (PD) andare presumed to be due to the underlying neurodegen-erative process, dopaminergic medications, underlyingvulnerabilities, and/or psychosocial factors. These symp-toms range from disorders of cognition, mood (depres-sion, mania), anxiety, hallucinations, to apathy.
1,2More
recently, a group of behaviors resulting from the chronic
and pulsatile administration of dopamine (the dopaminedysregulation syndrome) has been identiﬁed.
3These be-
haviors include “hedonistic homeostatic dysregulation”or a form of excessive and pathological use of dopami-nergic medications for nonmotor purposes and medica-tion-induced hypersexuality and pathological gambling.
While the efﬁcacy of bilateral deep brain stimulation(DBS) for the motor symptoms of advanced PD has beenwell established,
4the effects of DBS on these nonmotor
cognitive and psychiatric symptoms are less clear.
Thisarticle expands on the cognitive and neurobehav-
ioral aspects of DBS for PD and is intended as a com-panion to the preoperative and postoperative sections ofthe consensus articles. The concept of neuropsychologi-cal or cognitive issues and neuropsychiatric or neurobe-havioral issues will be separated for the sake of clarity,although overlaps will occur. It is recognized that on aclinical level, the assessment, management, and patho-physiology of these symptoms do not exist indepen-dently. It should be noted that in the vast majority ofwell-selected patients, DBS has demonstrated efﬁcacyand safety. Furthermore, despite the range of postopera-tive psychiatric symptoms reported, the majority of
*Correspondence to: Dr. Valerie Voon, Human Motor Control Sec-
tion, NINDS/NIH, Building 10, Room 5S213, 10 Center Drive MSC1428, Bethesda, MD 20892. E-mail: voonv@ninds.nih.gov
Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.
com). DOI: 10.1002/mds.20963Movement Disorders
Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006, pp. S305–S326© 2006 Movement Disorder Society
S305symptoms are transient, treatable, and potentially
preventable.
As very few data on stimulation of the ventrointerme-
dial nucleus (Vim) of the thalamus exist, this article willfocus primarily on the published literature on stimulationof the subthalamic nucleus (STN) and globus pallidusinternus (GPi) for PD. Outcome studies, methodologicalissues, pathophysiology, and the preoperative and post-operative management of the cognitive and psychiatricaspects of DBS for PD are discussed. The outcomes arecovered in more detail in the preoperative and postoper-ative sections of the consensus articles and will only bebrieﬂy discussed here. The focus of the article is onmethodological and pathophysiological issues. Issues re-garding preoperative and postoperative management ofpsychiatric aspects of DBS are found primarily in thetables.
OUTCOME STUDIES
A range of postoperative cognitive and neurobehav-
ioral symptoms have been reported following STN DBSand GPi DBS. While cognitive and neurobehavioralsymptoms were found to be less frequent following GPicompared to STN DBS in several small studies,
5–7the
literature is far from conclusive as detailed comparativedata have not been published. The discrepancies in neu-robehavioral outcome have been postulated to be relatedto changes in dopaminergic medications, anatomical dif-ferences between the STN and GPi, and methodologicalissues. For instance, STN DBS is associated with agreater reduction in dopaminergic medications than GPiDBS and symptoms such as depression and apathy havebeen have been linked to postoperative dopaminergicwithdrawal states.
8,9Consequently, some of the post-
STN stimulation neurobehavioral symptoms might re-ﬂect differences in management of dopaminergic medi-cation following surgery rather than surgical site per se.Alternatively, the STN is much smaller and more vari-able in orientation than the GPi. Thus, current spread toadjacent nonmotor circuits and possible electrode mis-placement are more likely to occur with STN than GPiDBS, thereby resulting in greater stimulation-relatedneurobehavioral symptoms. Finally, it is likely thatmethodological issues and biases in the literature con-tribute to the perception that STN DBS is associated withgreater neurobehavioral morbidity. For example, the lit-erature on GPi DBS has small cohort sizes, limitedlong-term follow-up data, and does not focus on neuro-psychiatric issues. The apparently greater rate of cogni-tive and psychiatric adverse events after STN comparedto GPi DBS may also reﬂect report bias. The earlystudies examining outcome following GPi DBS focused
on motor symptoms with relatively little attention paid tononmotor symptoms. In contrast, the more recent STNDBS studies have made a more concerted attempt toevaluate nonmotor as well as motor outcome followingsurgery. Similarly, while there have been no reports ofpsychiatric symptoms and very few cognitive studiesfollowing Vim DBS, this literature has the same meth-odological limitations and further selection bias issues asthe GPi literature.
As there is a more comprehensive literature including
several reviews on neuropsychological outcomes follow-ing DBS surgery for PD, we refer readers to recentcomprehensive reviews pertaining to the neuropsycho-logical literature.
10,11 The outcome studies on cognition
and stimulation for advanced PD are summarized inTable 1.
Subthalamic Stimulation
Cognitive Outcomes
The vast majority of the neuropsychological outcome
literature following DBS for PD has been published withpatients who underwent DBS in the STN. The ﬁndingsfrom these studies must be viewed with signiﬁcant cau-tion as most studies suffer from small sample sizes andonly three of the published studies included a PD controlgroup.
12–14
The majority of the outcome literature suggests that
STN DBS results in relatively little cognitive morbidityin well-selected patients.
13,15–20 Isolated studies note
mild improvements in mental ﬂexibility,15,21,22 working
memory,22visuomotor sequencing,16,20,22,23 conceptual
reasoning,22,23 and overall cognitive function.23
The most robust ﬁnding across studies appears to be a
decline in word ﬂuency,12–16,20,23–27 although other stud-
ies have also reported declines in verbal memo-ry,
13,15,23,24,28,29 conditional associative learning,22visuo-
spatial memory,15,24,29 processing speed,24and selected
measures of executive function.29Speciﬁc patient sub-
groups (e.g., older patients, patients with moderate cog-nitive impairment prior to surgery) may be at greater riskof sustaining cognitive and neurobehavioral deﬁ-cits.
15,24,28 –30 However, this has not been unequivocally
demonstrated. For example, the available data do notmake it clear if older age per se or other medical comor-bidities associated with older age are responsible for theincreased neurobehavioral changes found in some olderpatients following surgery.
Most studies include dementia as an exclusionary cri-
terion; thus, there are no large-scale prospective dataS306 V. VOON ET AL.
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006TABLE 1. Cognitive outcome studies following deep brain stimulation for advanced Parkinson’s disease
Reference Sample size Exclusion criteriaMedications/stimulation
statusPostoperative
test interval
(mo) Improvements Declines
Alegret and
colleagues15STN/H1100515 /H1102275 years, MMSE /H11349
25, majordepression,marked atrophyOff medications,
ON stimulation3 Trails B Phonemic and Semantic
Word ﬂuency,visuospatial (JOLO),verbal memory (ReyAVLT), Stroop Colorand Word,
Ardouin and
colleagues
16STN/H1100549,
GPi/H1100513Signiﬁcant cognitive
or moodimpairmentON stimulation,
offmedications
variable3-6 Trails A and B Phonemic and Total
Word ﬂuency
Daniele and
colleagues23STN/H1100520 History neurosurgery,
dementia, severepsychiatricdiagnosis, MMSE/H1102120Onmedications,
ON/OFFstimulation3, 6, 12, 18 MMSE (ON and
OFF stimulationat 3, 6, 12months); WCST-modiﬁed (ONstimulation at 3,6, 12 months)Phonemic Word ﬂuency
(ON and OFFstimulation, 3, 6, 12months), verballearning (Rey AVLT;OFF stimulation, 3months)
Dujardin and
colleagues
28STN/H110059 Not speciﬁed Onmedications,
ON stimulation3, 12 3 months: reaction
time test (trend)3 months: verbal
memory (Grober andBushke Word ListTest); 3 months: 30%(n/H110053) overall
cognitive declinedeﬁned as a declinemore than 1 SDbelow preoperativescores on 20% ormore of tests; 12months: StroopInterference
Funkiewiez and
colleagues
96STN/H1100550 Not speciﬁed On/off
medications,ON/OFFstimulation3-48 None noted None noted
Funkiewiez and
colleagues
26STN/H1100570 Not speciﬁed ON stimulation,
mostly off
medications12, 36 None noted Word ﬂuency
Gironell and
colleagues14STN/H110058,
unilateralGPi (L /H110055,
R/H110053), PD
controls /H110058/H1102270 years, MMSE
/H1102125, major
depression,marked atrophyOnmedications,
ON stimulation6 None noted STN: Semantic Word
ﬂuency
Hariz and
colleagues
31n/H110051 Not speciﬁed Onmedications,
ON stimulation1, 12 None noted Overall cognitive
function (assessedvia Kokmen ShortTests of MentalStatus)
Hershey and
colleagues
32STN/H1100524 Dementia on clinical
examination,history ofneurologicalevents, non-PDdiagnosisOff medications,
ON/OFFstimulation2 None noted Stimulation reduced
working memory/response inhibitionunder high-cognitive-demand conditions(Spatial DelayedResponse Task, Go–No Go Task)
Jahanshahi and
colleagues
22STN/H110057,
bilateralGPi/H110056Not speciﬁed Off medications,
OFF/ON/OFFstimulationNot speciﬁed STN stimulation:
trails B, WCST,random numbergeneration; STNor GPistimulation: trailsA, StroopControl, PVSAT,Missing DigitTest, modiﬁedGPi stimulation: random
number generation,WCST; GPi or STNstimulation:conditionalassociative learning(Visual–VisualConditional LearningTest)
Krack and
colleagues
18STN/H1100549 Dementia, major
ongoingpsychiatric illness,/H1102270 yearsOnmedications,
ON stimulation1, 3, 5 years None noted Three patients
developed dementia(per DSM-IVcriteria) over 5-yearinterval
Limousin and
colleagues
126STN/H1100520 /H1102270 years, MMSE
/H1102124, MRI
abnormalityOff medications,
ON stimulation12 None noted None noted
Lopiano and
colleagues127STN/H1100516 Dementia, depression
psychosis, MRIabnormalityNot speciﬁed 3 None noted None noted
Moretti and
colleagues12STN/H110059, PD
controls /H110059Not speciﬁed Not speciﬁed 1, 6, 12 None noted Stroop, Phonemic,
Semantic, SyllabicWord ﬂuencyNEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL/NEUROPSYCHIATRIC ISSUES S307
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006TABLE 1. (Continued)
Morrison and
colleagues13STN/H1100517, PD
controls /H11005
11Dementia ON/OFF
stimulation,medicationsvariable/H110113 None noted Surgery (without
stimulation): attentionand languagecomposite scorescomprised of severalmeasures (Digit Spanforward andbackward, Brief Testof Attention, BostonNaming Test,Phonemic andSemantic wordﬂuency); milddeclines in verbalmemory (HopkinsVLT-R, RandtMemory Test) as afunction of theprocedure (electrodeplacement andstimulation)
Moro and
colleagues
27STN/H110057 Dementia, ongoing
psychiatricproblems, priorbrain surgery, poorgeneral condition,mild parkinsonismor unstable drugregimenNot speciﬁed 9 None noted None noted
Perozzo and
colleagues
19STN/H1100520 “Important cognitive
decline,” severedepression,psychoticsymptoms, MRIabnormalityOn/off
medications,ON stimulation6 None noted None noted
Pillon and
colleagues
20STN/H1100548,
GPi/H110058Signiﬁcant cognitive
or moodimpairmentMost patients off
medications,ON/OFFstimulation3, 12 STN stimulation:
Stroop Word andColor, Trails;Graphic Series;reaction time;Spatial WorkingMemorySTN stimulation:
Semantic Wordﬂuency;
Saint-Cyr and
colleagues
24STN/H1100511 Dementia, prior
neurosurgery,unstable medicalstatus, MRIabnormality,current psychiatriccomplicationsOnmedications,
ON stimulation3-69-12 None noted Working memory
(PASAT, Digit Span,Backward), Trails B,manual speed andcoordination (Purduepegboard, coinsorting while ﬁngertapping), Phonemicand Semantic Wordﬂuency, verbalmemory (CVLTLong Delay Free andCued Recall),visuospatial memory(Battery of MemoryEfﬁciency), declinesmore apparent inpatients /H1102269 years
Trepanier and
colleagues
29Unilateral
pallidotomy/H1100542,
bilateralSTN/H110059,
bilateral GPi/H110054Dementia, other
neurological orunstable medicaldisorders, priorneurosurgery, MRIabnormality,current psychiatriccomplicationsOnmedications,
ON stimulation3, 6,/H1100612 None noted STN: Trails B, verbal
memory (CVLTLong Delay Free andCued Recall),Phonemic Wordﬂuency, visuallearning and memory(Battery of MemoryEfﬁciency); GPi:Phonemic Wordﬂuency, verbalmemory (CVLTLong Delay Free andCued Recall)
Volkman and
colleagues
5STN/H1100516,
GPi/H1100511Not speciﬁed Onmedications,
ON stimulation6, 12 None noted None noted
Witt and
colleagues21STN/H1100523 Dementia ( /H11021130
DRS)Onmedications,
ON/OFFstimulation6-12 ON stimulation:
Random NumberGeneration TestOFF stimulation: Stroop
Interference errorsS308 V. VOON ET AL.
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006available documenting the potential effect of STN DBS
on cognitive function in patients who met diagnosticcriteria for dementia prior to surgery. Krack and col-leagues
18reported the gradual development of dementia
in 3 of 49 patients who were followed for 5 yearsfollowing placement of DBS electrodes in the STN. No
patient met diagnostic criteria for dementia prior to sur-gery. The authors attributed the development of dementiato ongoing Parkinson’s disease progression as no acutecognitive changes were evident immediately followingTABLE 1. (Continued)
Fields and
colleagues54Staged bilateral
GPi/H110056Dementia, psychiatric
disturbance (exceptfor milddepression)Onmedications,
ON stimulation2 months
after ﬁrstDBS; 3monthsaftersecondDBSDelayed verbal
recall (CVLTLong Delay FreeRecall, LogicalMemory II),WCST,PerseverativeErrorsNone noted
Fukuda and
colleagues
128L GPi/H110052,
bilateral GPi/H110055Not speciﬁed ON stimulation Not noted DLPFC activation
during motorsequence learningNone noted
Miyawaki and
colleagues
62Bilateral GPi
/H110051Not speciﬁed Onmedications,
ON stimulationOne month
after leftDBS; 3weeksright DBSLeft GPi: Stroop
Color/Word;WMS-R FiguralMemory RightGPi: CVLT TotalTrials and LongDelay Free RecallRight GPi: CVLT
perseverations, Freeand Cued Recallintrusions
Tro¨ster and
colleagues
56GPi/H110059 Onmedications,
ON stimulation3 None noted DRS Construction
subtest, SemanticWord ﬂuency
Vingerhoets and
colleagues55L GPi/H1100513, R
GPi/H110057Dementia, MMSE /H11021
24, nonidiopathicPD, MRIabnormalities, anyillness that wouldcompromiseneuropsychologicalevaluationOnmedications,
ON stimulation3 None noted None noted on group
analyses, individualpatient analysesshowed decline in /H11011
30% of patients basedon study deﬁnedcognitive impairmentindex
Hugdahl and
Wester
65Mixed
thalamotomyand VimDBSNot speciﬁed Off medications?
ON stimulationNot noted Verbal memory None noted
Schuurman and
colleagues
68Mixed
thalamotomyand VimDBS withPD(thalamotomy/H1100521,DBS
/H1100519), ET
/H1100513, MS
/H110059MMSE /H1102124 Onmedications,
ON stimulation6 None noted Left stimulation:
Semantic Wordﬂuency
Tro¨ster and
colleagues
67Vim/H110059, L/H11005
5, R/H110054Non-PD diagnosis ON stimulation,
onmedications4 Verbal memory
(CVLT, DelayedRecognition,Logical MemoryII)None noted
Tro¨ster and
colleagues
129Vim/H110051 Not speciﬁed 3, 6 months: on
medications andON stimulation;18 months: on/
offmedications
and ON/OFFstimulation3, 6, 18 3 months: DRS
Construction; 6months: semanticword ﬂuency,verbal learning(CVLT); 18months (ON vs.OFF stimulation):semantic ﬂuency3 months: Semantic
Word ﬂuency, verballearning; 18 months(ON vs. OFFstimulation): episodicmemory
Woods and
colleagues
66Unilateral
Vim/H110056No longer responsive
to DA medicationsor intolerable DASEOnmedications,
ON stimulation12 DRS
Conceptualization;Verbal Memory(CVLT LongDelay Free Recall,WMS-I, LogicalMemory I)None noted
AVLT, Auditory Verbal Learning Test; CVLT, California Verbal Learning test; DA, dopamine; DLPFC, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; DRS, Mattis
Dementia Rating Scale; DSM-IV, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorder, 4th edition; GPi, globus pallidus interna; JOLO, Judgmentof Line Orientation Test; L, left; MMSE, Mini Mental Status Exam; PVSAT, Paced Visual Serial Addition Test; R, right; SD, standard deviation;STN, subthalamic nucleus; Trails A and B, Trail Making Test, Part A and B; Vim, ventrointeromedial nucleus of the thalamus; VLT, Verbal LearningTest; WCST, Wisconsin Card Sorting Test; WMS-R, Wechsler Memory Scale–Revised; SE, side effects.NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL/NEUROPSYCHIATRIC ISSUES S309
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006surgery in the three patients and the bulk of the literature
indicates that stimulation does not result in marked cog-nitive declines.
Although most of the literature suggests that STN
DBS is relatively benign from a cognitive perspective,there are reports of patients who sustained signiﬁcantcognitive decline following surgery. Morrison and col-leagues
13stated that 1 of their 20 subjects demonstrated
signiﬁcant cognitive decline following surgery with laterimprovement in function following STN stimulation. De-spite the improvement noted with stimulation, his overallcognitive function was worse after surgery and he had tomove from an independent to an assisted living settingdue to cognitive changes. He was an older man, butanother case report by Hariz and colleagues
31docu-
mented a similar negative outcome in a 53-year-oldfollowing placement of DBS electrodes in the STN.Thus, it does not appear that age per se is the onlypredictor of a potentially deleterious cognitive outcome.To date, little has been done to assess potential cognitiverisk factors systematically.
Only a handful of studies have systematically exam-
ined the role of stimulation and/or medications on neu-ropsychological performance. Systematic assessmentON and OFF STN stimulation demonstrated either nosigniﬁcant cognitive effects
13or improvements in pro-
cessing speed,20,22 working memory,20,22 random number
generation,21,22 and problem-solving22with stimulation.
One study demonstrated a decline in performance on aconditional associative learning task
22following stimu-
lation, and impairments in response inhibition measures(self-detected errors on Stroop interference task) havealso been documented.
21Performances on working
memory and response inhibition measures under high-cognitive-demand conditions were shown to decline withSTN stimulation.
32Systematic assessment onand off
medications during STN stimulation was not associatedwith cognitive changes
19on a variety of neuropsycho-
logical measure, including tests sensitive to frontostriataldysfunction [the Raven Color Matrices, Corsi BlockTapping Test, Bisyllabic Words Repetition Test, PairedAssociates Learning Test, Spatial Learning Test, River-mead Behavioural Memory Test, Visual Search Test,Reaction Times Tests, Modiﬁed Wisconsin Card SortingTest, Trial Making B Test, and word ﬂuency measures(category, phonemic)]. These ﬁndings are at odds withprevious reports in the literature that demonstrated cog-nitive changes associated with dopaminergic medica-tions in unoperated PD patients. The discrepant ﬁndingsmight reﬂect methodological issues such as limitedpower or measurement factors and clearly, more data areneeded to evaluate the role of medication status in cog-
nitive function ON and OFF STN DBS.
Neuropsychiatric Outcomes
Like cognitive outcomes, the outcome data on neuro-
psychiatric symptoms should be approached with cautiondue to similar methodological issues. The following fre-quencies of postoperative psychiatric symptoms havebeen reported following STN stimulation. Transient con-fusion in the immediate postoperative period has beenreported in 1% to 36% of patients.
4,8,18,33– 40 Postopera-
tive hypomania has been reported in 4% to 15% of
patients, usually occurring within the ﬁrst 3 postopera-
tive months.18,38,41,42 Emotional reactivity, or excessive
mood-congruent emotional responses to minor triggers,was identiﬁed in 75% of STN stimulation patients.
30
Suicide attempts and/or suicides have been documentedin uncontrolled series ranging from 0.5% to2.9%.
18,30,43,44 A multicenter study of 450 STN DBS
patients reported a postoperative suicide rate of 0.5%.45
In contrast, a study of 120 patients who underwent DBS
(including PD, dystonia, and essential tremor patients)documented a postoperative suicide rate of 2.9% in PDpatients who had undergone STN DBS.
44
Individual episodes of postoperative depression have
been reported in 1.5% to 25% of patients.8,18,30,33,38,46 – 48
Although overall group depression scores have beenreported to improve at 3, 12, and 36 months,
8,26,42,49,50
the clinical relevance of these ﬁndings is not clear. Stud-ies designed to examine mood symptoms utilizing stan-dardized diagnostic criteria reported frequencies of 21%and 25% with the onset of depression within the ﬁrst 2postoperative months.
25,30 Another study distinguishing
between depression requiring antidepressants and de-pression secondary to dopaminergic withdrawal symp-toms reported rates of 18% and 38%, respectively.
8In a
large 3-year study using patient-rated depression scalecutoff scores, moderate to severe depression was docu-mented at baseline in 33%, in 20% in the ﬁrst postoper-ative year and in 15% in the third postoperative year.
26
Without a control group, the implications of these re-
ported frequencies are not clear. Potential misinterpreta-
tions of ﬁndings in uncontrolled studies are illustrated inthe literature on pallidotomy. Early uncontrolled studiessuggested an elevated risk of postoperative depressionfollowing bilateral posteroventral pallidotomy.
51,52 How-
ever, a subsequent prospective randomized wait list con-
trol group study did not demonstrate any differences indepression outcomes in the surgical or wait list controlgroup.
53Furthermore, the only risk associated with de-S310 V. VOON ET AL.
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006pression was a past history of depression, irrespective of
surgical procedure.53
Within the ﬁrst 3 postoperative months, transient apathy
occurs as part of the dopaminergic withdrawal syndrome,although the incidence is not known. The proportion ofpatients with apathy as measured on the UPDRS part I wasdocumented at baseline to be 8.7% and at the third postop-erative year to be 24.6%.
26Permanent apathy was reported
in the long term in 12% of patients, among whom 80% hadan associated dementia.
18In this same longitudinal study,
no visual hallucinations were reported within the ﬁrst 3postoperative months but in the long term 10% developedvisual hallucinations. Sixty percent of the patients withhallucinations also had associated dementia.
18Overall, 6%
of patients in the study developed dementia in the longterm.
18One study reported that 6% developed visual hal-
lucinations or psychotic symptoms, although whether theseoccurred in the early or late postoperative period is notclear.
8
The effects of DBS on patients’ social reintegration
and adjustment have received limited attention. In aretrospective study, late age of onset of PD was associ-ated with poor global social adjustment. Persistent levo-dopa-induced motor symptoms were associated withpoor adjustments in social outcome measures. Despitemotor improvements, 25% had a deterioration in maritalrelations following surgery.
30
The frequency of reported psychiatric symptoms in the
literature varies for a variety of reasons: selection bias (e.g.,differences in the inclusion of patients with preoperativepsychiatric and cognitive vulnerabilities), measurement bias(e.g., differences in methods of assessment and diagnosticascertainment), or lack of systematic consideration of con-founding variables (e.g., differences in the rate or degree ofchange of dopaminergic medications).
The most common psychiatric symptoms observed
include apathy, emotional reactivity, depression, and hy-pomania. The reasons for such a range of symptomsobserved is due to the multifactorial etiology of thepsychiatric symptoms, including preoperative vulnerabil-ity, changes in dopaminergic medications, surgical andstimulation effects, underlying PD-related factors, andpsychosocial effects. The pathophysiology underlyingthese different psychiatric symptoms is discussed inmore detail below.
GPi Stimulation
Cognitive Outcomes
Neuropsychological changes following GPi DBS have
been investigated. Several studies have not documentedany signiﬁcant cognitive decline following GPi
DBS.
29,54,55 Mild declines in semantic word ﬂuency56,57
and visuoconstruction scores56have been documented.
Pallidal surgery (i.e., pallidotomy or GPi DBS) in PDpatients appears to disrupt frontosubcortical circuits un-derlying efﬁcient shifting between semantic categoriesand/or access to semantic categories rather than affectingsemantic stores.
58
In one study, a subgroup of older patients demon-
strated a higher postoperative rate of mild cognitivedeﬁcits, although the clinical and statistical signiﬁcanceof these ﬁndings is uncertain.
55In particular, this study
deﬁned cognitive change in a very liberal manner (anymagnitude of change in the percentage of tests falling 1SD below normative means) and did not ﬁnd any signif-icant changes in average scores.
These observations highlight that some patients might
be at increased risk for neurobehavioral deﬁcits follow-ing DBS. For example, signiﬁcant executive dysfunctionwas described in a case report following chronic bilateralGPi stimulation that was partially reversible with discon-tinuation of stimulation.
59
Neuropsychiatric Outcomes
Postoperative psychiatric symptoms in GPi DBS are
believed to be less frequent than after STN DBS. In oneunblinded comparative study, 3 of 16 STN versus 0 of 11GPi patients developed depression requiring psychiatrictreatment.
8In a 1-year follow-up of a small blinded
parallel randomized study, whereas none of the 11 GPipatients developed neuropsychiatric complications, 2 of12 STN patients developed transient perioperative anxi-ety, 1 of 12 transient hallucinations responding to adecrease in levodopa dose, and 1 of 12 persistent apathyin the context of cognitive changes.
6In an extension of a
third unblinded randomized comparative study reportingon the 3- to 4-year outcomes, persistent neuropsychiatricadverse events were more common in the STN comparedto GPi group, although few details were reported. Forinstance, 11 of 49 STN patients developed unspeciﬁedmild–moderate memory or psychiatric difﬁculties com-pared to 1 of 20 GPi patients. Of these psychiatric events,3 of 49 STN patients had a mild–moderate depressioncompared with 1 of 20 GPi patients.
7
While these preliminary data are intriguing, based on
the reasons previously discussed, the literature is farfrom conclusive; larger controlled studies using system-atic validated assessment tools are required. Overall im-provement in group depression and anxiety scores havebeen documented with bilateral GPi, although the clini-cal relevance is not known.
8,60,61 One study that differ-NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL/NEUROPSYCHIATRIC ISSUES S311
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006entiated between primary and secondary anxiety sug-
gested that GPi stimulation improved primary anxietysymptoms.
61Case reports of mania have been reported.62
Case reports of hypersexuality have been reported, al-though it is unclear if this was part of a manic syndromeor dopamine dysregulation.
63,64
Thalamic Stimulation
Very few studies have examined the neuropsycholog-
ical consequences of Vim DBS for the treatment of PD.These studies have been hampered by small cohorts,mixed thalamotomy or Vim stimulation groups, or mixedpatient groups with non-PD diagnoses, thus limiting gen-eralization of the ﬁndings. On the whole, thalamotomy orVim DBS appears not to have a signiﬁcant effect oncognitive abilities.
65,66 Improvements in verbal memory
have been documented.65– 67 Left-sided Vim stimulation
may be more likely to be associated with verbal ﬂuencydecline.
68Despite the limited evidence, Vim is consid-
ered a relatively safe target with fewer cognitive orneurobehavioral sequelae, particularly since postopera-tive changes in dopaminergic medications are less nec-essary and the stimulation site is less likely to overlapwith regions with limbic activity (see Lang and col-leagues in this issue for further details on patientselection).
METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES
Numerous methodological issues confront DBS re-
search on neurobehavioral outcomes.
10,11 The greatest
methodological issues in the current literature are thesmall sample sizes and the general absence of controlgroups.
Sample Size and Power to Detect Effects
Modest sample sizes limit the power of a study to
detect the effects of DBS on cognition and behavior andalso limit the reliability and generalizability of ﬁndings.For instance, a recent study investigated the issue ofsample size by calculating the effect sizes and statisticalpower associated with verbal ﬂuency changes reported inpreviously published studies.
69The parameter of verbal
ﬂuency was selected given its relatively common andsizeable neuropsychological change after DBS. The au-thors found that the power to detect verbal ﬂuencychanges was typically very low, ranging in publishedstudies from 0.06 to 0.45 (power is expressed in a rangefrom 0 to 1, with 1 indicating perfect or 100% power, andadequate power is commonly accepted to be 0.80 orabove). Furthermore, in reviewing 30 neuropsychologi-cal studies of STN DBS, only 2 of 30 studies hadadequate power to detect large effect sizes and none had
the power to detect small or medium effects. Conse-quently, the neuropsychological safety of DBS may beoverestimated.
Control Groups and Inferences About Change
The absence of control groups makes it difﬁcult to
determine whether a change occurring after DBS mightalso have occurred in a nonoperated control group, thusreﬂecting non-DBS factors (e.g., disease progression,medication, test–retest practice effects, or some otherextraneous variable). Several practical and ethical difﬁ-culties exist in selecting and obtaining a control group.
10
Given the now widespread availability of DBS, it isincreasingly difﬁcult to recruit the most relevant controlfor DBS research: a surgical wait list control group. APD control group not matched to the surgical group indisease and demographic characteristics is a secondaryoption and is preferable to using a normal control group.However, even use of a wait list control group is notwithout potential interpretative pitfalls. Since medicationdosage is often greatly reduced after STN DBS, neurobe-havioral changes, when they occur in the surgical but notthe control group, cannot conﬁdently be interpreted aseffects of DBS. Medication effects, although expected tobe mild, can both positively and negatively impact cog-nitive functions and have a more profound effect onmood. The interactive effect of surgery or DBS andmedication is a further complexity. For example, it hasrecently been shown that pallidotomy may alter the ef-fect that levodopa has on certain cognitive functions.
70
Test–Retest Effects
The absence of a control group makes it difﬁcult to
determine the extent to which changes in test scoresreﬂect practice effects. When individuals undergo re-peated evaluations using the same or similar test instru-ments, scores may improve simply due to experiencewith the test rather than improvement of the functionbeing evaluated. Strategies to minimize practice effectsinclude employing multiple versions of the test that dif-fer in speciﬁc content but not in difﬁculty, maximizingthe test–retest interval, or utilizing statistical techniquessuch as Reliable Change Indexes or standardized regres-sion-based norms.
71–73 Notably, a familiarity or “test
wise” effect may occur even when alternate forms areused.
The proper PD control group remains necessary even
when one has knowledge of test–retest effects in testnormative samples because it is generally not knownwhether similar test–retest effects occur in normative andS312 V. VOON ET AL.
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006clinical populations. For instance, there is suggestion that
practice effects may not occur in PD on numeroustests.
13,74 The absence of “assumed practice effects”
complicates interpretations of both the presence and theabsence of test score changes. For example, if a practiceeffect does not occur in PD, then postoperative scoregains likely represent improvements rather than practiceeffects, while the lack of gain or decrements likely rep-resent a true lack of change or deterioration, respectively.Conversely, if practice effects occur in PD, then a lack ofgain may represent a decline. Furthermore, if practiceeffects do occur, then small declines in scores mayactually represent a sizeable deterioration in function,and a score gain would have to exceed the practice effectbefore it is considered an improvement. Interpreting in-dividual patient test score changes is rendered even morecomplex by possible interactions between surgery, med-ication, stimulation, and practice effects.
Changes in Average Scores vs. Caseness and
Frequency of Changes
Most studies focusing on neurobehavioral changes
associated with DBS report changes in group meanscores on various tests, symptom self-report inventories,and rating scales. Studies should more consistently reportthe frequency of individual changes of various magni-tudes and also changes in caseness. That is, changes inaverage scores and caseness (the number of personshaving a condition, such as depression, before and aftersurgery) do not always go hand in hand and may bemisleading.
75The establishment of caseness and fre-
quency of changes of given magnitude are important indetermining the incidence of certain conditions beforeand after surgery and thus more accurately deﬁne therisks of morbidity.
Other Methodological Issues
The current lack of accurate estimates of the incidence
of various conditions before and after DBS highlightsseveral other methodological needs. Speciﬁcally, studiesshould be prospective and assess neurobehavioral func-tions systematically. Unfortunately, many studies appearto have relied on the patient’s or caregivers’ spontaneousreport of changes after surgery, subjective impressions ofpatients and physicians, or on retrospective searches ofdatabases in documenting cognitive or psychiatricchanges following DBS. Studies should also use stan-dardized criteria and test instruments and several authorshave already commented thoughtfully and extensively onconsiderations in neuropsychological test selection formovement disorders surgery.
20,24,72To identify preoperative predictors of neurobehavioral
morbidity, preexisting neurobehavioral conditionsshould be accurately deﬁned and systematically assessedand diagnosed. The identiﬁcation of neurobehavioraloutcome predictors represents an urgent clinical need.Most studies have excluded, not assessed, or not reportedon patients with preoperative neurobehavioral symp-toms. In order to determine the role of preoperativeneurobehavioral symptoms in postoperative outcomes,prospective studies with such groups of patients arerequired.
The screening of patients for behavioral conditions,
the formation of diagnostic subgroups, and outcomeevaluation should be achieved using different test in-struments, otherwise circularity may occur. Since ascore on a given instrument is usually the best predic-tor of a score obtained by the same person on thatinstrument at a later time point (given shared constructand method variance), separate measures would ide-ally be used to deﬁne risk factors and outcomes.Consequently, an ideal evaluation would utilize mul-tiple measures of the same construct that rely ondifferent administration methods to provide conver-gent evidence of change.
Several other knowledge gaps related to method-
ological and study design limitations remain to beaddressed in future studies. Very few studies havecompared STN DBS outcome with stimulators turnedON or OFF.
20,22 Fewer studies have examined the
relationship between stimulation parameters and cog-nition,
76behavior,77or subjective psychotropic ef-
fects.26No studies have systematically varied stimu-
lation parameters and assessed cognition in a within-subject design. Future studies should clearly indicatestimulation parameters in their patients and how elec-trode placement was veriﬁed. Behavioral studies, inaddition, should control for standard markers associ-ated with neurobehavioral outcomes (e.g., family his-tory of depression and depression outcome in PD, theeffects of mood on obsessive– compulsive ratingscores) and psychosocial factors. The literature is dif-ﬁcult to interpret given the signiﬁcant heterogeneity inparticipants, surgical and neurobehavioral evaluationmethods, time intervals between assessments, andpostoperative medication adjustments. Large multi-center collaborative studies are likely needed to ad-dress important questions about neurobehavioral out-comes and their prediction, and in particular, aboutlong-term outcomes.NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL/NEUROPSYCHIATRIC ISSUES S313
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF PSYCHIATRIC AND
COGNITIVE SYMPTOMS ASSOCIATED WITH
SUBTHALAMIC STIMULATION
The postoperative cognitive and psychiatric symptoms
evident following DBS, similar to those observed in PDitself, most likely reﬂect a multifactorial etiology. Forinstance, six etiological factors, which are not necessar-ily mutually exclusive, can be postulated to account forthe psychiatric symptoms following STN stimulation:preoperative factors (including premorbid psychiatricvulnerabilities),
30surgical factors (e.g., the duration of
the surgical procedure, electrode trajectories, the numberof electrode passes, complications),
24STN stimulation
factors (e.g, placement, parameters),78postoperative fac-
tors (e.g., antiparkinsonian drug changes),9psychosocial
adjustment,79and underlying PD-related factors (e.g, theneurodegenerative process and involvement of nondo-
paminergic symptoms).80The following section on
pathophysiology focuses primarily on STN stimulationrather than GPi or Vim. Given the paucity of data in theliterature, the following discussion is by nature specula-tive. Some aspects of the pathophysiology on neurobe-havioral symptoms and its relationship to stimulation forPD have been reviewed in the literature.
45,81
Table 2 outlines neuroanatomic regions and down-
stream connections of potential psychiatric relevance,
which may be affected by STN stimulation either di-rectly, by current spread, or by misplaced electrodes.
Table 3 summarizes some of the neurobehavioral
changes associated with the treatment of PD with spe-ciﬁc reference to STN activity. The range of behavioralsymptoms associated with presumed increases or de-TABLE 2. Regions implicated in psychiatric symptoms associated with subthalamic stimulation for Parkinson’s disease
Neuroanatomical regions Comments
Medial limbic subthalamic nucleus Connection via indirect CSTC pathway to limbic cortical regions88,130; embroyologically and structurally
related to LH with efferents to VTA88,131; implicated in psychiatric symptoms of STN stimulation81
Anterodorsolateral sensorimotor
subthalamic nucleusMost effective site of stimulation for motor symptoms132,133; potential regions affected: current diffusion
to ZI or H2 ﬁelds of Forel132,134; retrograde stimulation of afferent dopaminergic or serotonergic
neurons from SN or DRN; anterograde stimulation of ascending dopaminergic neurons projecting to
basal ganglia135,136
Anterior cingulate (AC),
orbitofrontal cortex, amygdalaConnection to medial limbic STN via indirect CSTC pathway and connections of basal ganglia
circuitry88,130; impaired performance on response conﬂict task associated with decreased activation of
right AC in STN DBS patients137
Lateral hypothalamus and ventral
tegmental areaMedial limbic STN embryologically and structurally related to LH; efferent projection from LH to
VTA88,131; VTA implicated in reinforcing effects of drugs of abuse138; implicated in psychiatric
symptoms of STN stimulation81
Subgenual cingulate (Cg25) Cg25 postulated to play a modulatory role in major depression and normal sadness139; Cg25 efferents to
LH in nonhuman primates140; LH and medial limbic STN embryologically and structurally
related88,131; Cg25 efferents to brainstem, ventral striatal, and thalamic regions140with indirect
connections to STN
Zona incerta Structural and functional relationship between hypothalamus and rostral ZI implicated in autonomic
symptoms141; cingulate cortical efferents to rostral and dorsal ZI in rodents142; reciprocal projection
of SN pars reticulata and pars compacta to ZI143; reciprocal projection of amygdala to rostral ZI in
rodents144; ﬁber bundles within or adjacent to ZI: ascending dopaminergic neurons from SN135,136;
ascending serotonergic ﬁbers; ﬁelds of Forel and pallidosubthalamic ﬁbers119; stimulation of ZI
associated with depressive symptoms89
Substantia nigra Reciprocal projections of STN to SN88; ascending projections from SN to striatum via MFB run through
ZI and appositioned to anterodorsal border of STN135,136; stimulation of SN pars reticulata ( /H11006pars
compacta) associated with acute depressive symptoms78
Medial forebrain bundle SN and VTA project to striatum and cortex via MFB which ascends near ZI135,136
Pedunculopontine nucleus Reciprocal projections of PPN to STN88,145; implicated in STN hyperactivity in PD animal model145;
observed motivational effects in excitotoxic lesioned PPN in rodent models may be mediated by
executive deﬁcits146,147
Dorsal raphe nucleus Serotonergic ﬁber efferents from DRN to STN88; ascending serotonergic ﬁbers to widespread cortical
regions run through ZI
Area TE of inferotemporal cortex CSTC pathway originating in area TE117; hypothesized to be involved in visual hallucinations in PD117
Fiber bundles Stimulation more likely to affect large myelinated axons than cell bodies148; most effective site of
stimulation at anterodorsal border of sensorimotor STN with current diffusion to ﬁber bundles located
at or near ZI132,133
Thalamic nuclei Afferents from parafascicular (PF) thalamic nuclei to STN implicated in STN hyperactivity in PD
animal models145; PF nuclei project primarily to limbic and cognitive STN regions88
Adapted from Voon and colleagues.45
CSTC, cortico–striato–thalamo– cortical; DRN, dorsal raphe nucleus; LH, lateral hypothalamus; MFB, medial forebrain bundle; PD, Parkinson’s
disease; PPN, pedunculopontine nucleus; SN, substantia nigra; STN, subthalamic nucleus; VTA, ventral tegmental area; ZI, zona incerta.S314 V. VOON ET AL.
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006creases in STN activity was used to organize the data and
the presumed relationships to various frontosubcorticalcircuits are highlighted. Increased STN activity is gen-erally associated with restricted behavior and decreasedSTN activity typically results in excessive behavior. It isrecognized that the symptoms likely have a signiﬁcantlymore complex pathophysiology.
Depression
Individual episodes of postoperative depression have
been reported in 1.5% to 25% of patients.
8,18,30,33,38,46 – 48
The literature on the prevalence of postoperative depres-sion is discussed in the outcomes section.
The prevalence of depression in PD is between 40% to
50%,
82with the incidence rate reported to be 1.86% per
year.83The natural course of PD likely plays a greater
role in the depression occurring long after surgery asopposed to that observed soon after surgery.
Based on the literature, it is not clear if a history of
preoperative depression is a risk factor for early postop-erative depression. For instance, in one retrospectivereview, 33% of patients with a preoperative history ofdepression developed postoperative depression, suggest-ing that a history of preoperative depression acts as a riskfactor but is not necessarily predictive of this outcome.
30
In contrast, a prospective study found that a personalhistory of depression, family psychiatric history, andpreoperative depression scores did not differentiate be-tween the postoperatively depressed (25%) and nonde-pressed groups.
25The factors associated with postoper-
ative depression included postoperative confusion andfemale gender.
25Severe depression at baseline appears to
be a risk factor for depression in the long term. Tenpercent of 77 patients had severe depression at 3 years, ofwhich half had been severely depressed at baseline.
26Apreoperative survey documented that 60% of patients
presenting for STN surgery had a past history of depres-sion requiring antidepressants.
84Whether effective treat-
ment and antidepressant prophylaxis of the preoperativedepression change this risk is not known.
Dopaminergic medication withdrawal has been asso-
ciated with transient depressive symptoms.
8,9The affec-
tive and behavioral effects of levodopa abuse have beencompared to those due to psychostimulants (drugs thatincrease catecholaminergic activity), suggesting similarunderlying neural substrates to the withdrawal states.
85
In addition, dopaminergic agonists have also been dem-
onstrated to improve depression rating scores in majordepression associated with PD, suggesting a potentialdopaminergic role.
86
Reports of stimulation-locked depressive states are
infrequent but help delineate an association with stimu-lation. However, the signiﬁcance of these acute changesis not clear; for instance, it is not known if the symptomspersist in the long term or if neuroplastic changes occur.Clinical observations must also carefully differentiatebetween acute stimulation-induced mood symptoms andautonomic or anxiety effects.
77The STN is a small
nucleus (180 mm3)87surrounded by dense ﬁber bun-
dles.88STN stimulation may be associated with mood
changes due to current spread to the small medial limbictip of the STN, the surrounding ﬁber bundles, or stimu-lation may affect afferent or efferent connections tocortical, brainstem, and thalamic regions by anterogradeor retrograde stimulation. In addition, current may spreadinto adjacent structures, such as the posterior hypothal-amus or midbrain tegmentum and their connections.
A depressive state fulﬁlling DSM-IV criteria was re-
ported with stimulation of the left central substantia nigraTABLE 3. Neurobehavioral symptoms proposed to be associated with stimulation of the subthalamic motor, cognitive, and
limbic regions in Parkinson’s disease
Behavior of InterestIncreased STN activity88,149-152
(offdrug or OFF STN stimulation)Decreased STN activity152,153
(ondrug or ON STN stimulation)
Motor (motor circuit) Bradykinesia,149-151rigidity,149-151tremor,153off
dystonia154Dyskinesias152,154
Cognition (DLPFC) Bradyphrenia,155,156executive function deﬁcits,157,158
impaired working memory,157,158reduced
conditional associative learning22Enhanced cognitive ﬂexibility,21,22improved
executive function,22improved working
memory,20increased psychomotor speed,22
Response inhibition (ventromedial
orbitofrontal cortex)Disinhibition/impaired response
inhibition21,22,24
Mood (anterior cingulate and
orbitofrontal cortex)Off period depression8,9,159-161Mania/hypomania, impaired emotional
control9,30,41,43,84,92,96
Motivation/ goal directed behavior
(anterior cingulate)Apathy22,23,111,112Aspects of dopamine dysregulation syndrome3
Adapted from Funkiewiez and colleagues.96
STN, subthalamic nucleus; DLPFC, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL/NEUROPSYCHIATRIC ISSUES S315
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006primarily within the pars reticulata.78The symptoms
were suggested to be due to stimulation of nigral ornigrothalamic ﬁbers. An increase in cerebral blood ﬂowwas demonstrated in the left orbitofrontal cortex, globuspallidus, amygdala, anterior thalamus, and the right pa-rietal lobe. A similar state was reported with stimulationof the right zona incerta/ﬁelds of Forel,
89suggested to be
due to stimulation of ﬁber bundles within the zona in-certa/ﬁelds of Forel, or connections of the STN to thesubstantia nigra or pedunculopontine nucleus. Right-sided BOLD signal increases were demonstrated in thesuperior prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate, anteriorthalamus, caudate, and brainstem and decreases in me-dial prefrontal cortex. The symptoms reported in thelatter paper could not be reproduced despite a trial ofidentical stimulation parameters suggesting a role forneuroplastic adaptation.
In contrast, two patients were described with stimula-
tion-linked easy tearfulness, which was qualitatively dif-ferent from the patients’ premorbid experience of majordepression.
43Similar symptoms of acute sadness second-
ary to an increase in stimulation parameters has also beendescribed.
90Three of these ﬁve cases of acute depressive
states had a premorbid history of depression suggesting apotential interaction between an underlying vulnerabilityand the site of stimulation.
43,89
These reports suggest that while dysphoric states may
occur with stimulation of electrodes located within theSTN, depressive symptoms that are associated with therange of vegetative, cognitive, and motivational symp-toms of a major depression may be more likely to beassociated with electrodes misplaced outside the STN.
Stimulation of optimally placed contacts in either uni-
lateral STN or GPi was found to be associated withgreater improvement of mood in comparison to beingOFF stimulation in a study of acute mood changes fol-lowing blinded randomized changes in stimulation.
77
Stimulation dorsal or ventral to the optimal contact wasassociated with greater worsening of mood for the STNgroup than for the GPi group. Changes in mood weresuggested to be more likely to be associated with STNstimulation as compared to GPi given differences in thesizes of the nuclei and thus greater current spread to thenonmotor STN, adjacent ﬁbers, and nearby structures.
Psychosocial factors including psychological re-
sponses to motor and functional changes, unrealisticexpectations, poor supports, or changes in identity orrelationships are also likely to play a role in postopera-tive depression. Psychosocial changes have been re-ported following other major life-altering surgeries
91and
have been noted after STN stimulation.30Furthermore,psychosocial factors such as marital status, past and
current stressors, support, and underlying personalitytraits can also be associated with depression in the gen-eral population.
Based on the literature
8,9and on clinical experience,
we speculate that the dysphoric or depressive symptomsthat occur within the ﬁrst three postoperative monthsare most commonly secondary to dopaminergic with-drawal symptoms potentially interacting with premorbidvulnerabilities. That acute mood changes may not bereproducible using the same parameters suggests a rolefor neuroplastic adaptation. Stimulation-induced acutepsychiatric symptoms, while intriguing, are infrequentand likely transient. As yet, there has not been anyconvincing evidence for long-term effects of STN stim-
ulation resulting in depressive symptoms. Stimulation
within the STN may occasionally be associated withdysphoria. However, the limited frequency of occurrenceof acute stimulation-induced dysphoric symptoms sug-gests either a placement effect within the STN (e.g., thatthe stimulated electrode was located closer to the mediallimbic STN or that current had spread to peri-STN re-gions) or a potential interaction with underlying vulner-abilities such as a mood diathesis, emotional reactivity,or personality traits consistent with an affective releasephenomenon.
Depressive symptoms occurring late in the postoper-
ative period may be more likely related to premorbidvulnerabilities, the natural course of depression in PD,and psychosocial factors. Dopaminergic withdrawal maystill continue to play a more muted role and the symp-toms should be distinguished from apathy.
Hypomanic/Manic Symptoms
Postoperative hypomania has been reported in 4% to
15% of patients following STN stimulation surgery, usu-ally occurring within the ﬁrst 3 postoperativemonths.
18,38,41,42
The observation of stimulation-linked mirthful laugh-
ter and more chronic euphoria and hypomania occurringwithin the same patient who had undergone STN stim-ulation has led some authors to hypothesize a continuum
of symptoms characterized by mood elevation with po-tentially similar underlying pathophysiology.
92Mirthful
laughter is characterized by excessive and inappropriatelaughter in response to trivial stimuli. In contrast topathological laughter in which the affective state oflaughter is dissociated from the mood state, in mirthfullaughter, the affective state of laughter is congruent withthe mood state of mirth.S316 V. VOON ET AL.
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006However, euphoria is common following transplant
surgery,93suggesting a commonality in the observed
psychological reactive improvements following life-al-tering surgery. As such, the euphoria observed after STNDBS may also be related to psychological reactiveimprovements.
In contrast, the hypomania or mania observed after
STN DBS may be more likely to have alternate expla-nations related to underlying biological factors. For in-stance, hypomania has been observed prior to initiationof STN stimulation, suggesting an etiological effect oflocalized edema or a microlesion effect.
41Furthermore,
two patients in whom high STN stimulation parameterstemporally linked to acute mirthful laughter have beendescribed.
92The authors proposed that chronic stimula-
tion of the STN–limbic system, particularly involving thelateral hypothalamus and ventral tegmental area projec-tions, could play a role in the observed euphoria, hypo-mania, and improvements in depression rating scores. Adissociation between the motor and limbic circuits hasfurther been reported in a patient in whom stimulation-linked manic symptoms did not improve with termina-tion of stimulation, whereas immediate changes in par-kinsonian symptoms were apparent OFF stimulation.
94
Stimulation of the limbic system outside of the STN,
such as within the midbrain caudal to the substantianigra, has also been implicated with manic symptoms.
95
Proposed etiologies have included stimulation of ventraltegmental area projections or midbrain projections to thefrontal cortex.
STN stimulation and dopaminergic medications have
been observed to be synergistic. Postoperative maniaimproves with either a decrease in stimulation or with adecrease in dopaminergic medications, thus emphasizingthe role of appropriate postoperative management ofstimulation and medications.
9,41Mania, hypomania, and
euphoria have all been associated with dopaminergicmedications. Parallels between the mood-enhancing ef-fects of levodopa and STN stimulation were investigatedusing systematic questionnaires
96measuring the percep-
tion of euphoria, motivation, fatigue, anxiety, and ten-sion. Patients in the ON stimulation state and those on
levodopa both perceived a greater improvement of thesefeatures as compared to the groups of patients in the OFFstimulation state and those off levodopa. Given their
similarities, mood-elevating properties of both STNstimulation and levodopa were suggested to be mediatedby the STN–limbic system.
Some of the reported patients with postoperative
manic symptoms have a history of premorbid depression,emotional lability, or a family history of bipolar disorder,suggesting the potential role of premorbid vulnerabil-
ity.
41,92,94 A preoperative survey documented 10% of
patients presenting for STN stimulation had a history ofmedication-induced mania.
84Of four patients described
in the literature with a preoperative history of medica-tion-induced hypomania/mania, two have had transientpostoperative mania, suggesting an interaction betweenunderlying vulnerabilities, stimulation, and medicationchanges.
34,84
Based on the literature and on clinical experience,
postoperative hypomania is likely predominantly due to
the synergistic interaction between stimulation and do-
paminergic stimulation affecting similar dopaminergic-mediated regions. That mania has mood (euphoria), mo-tivational (increased goal directed activity), cognitive(increased rate of thought processes or rapid speech), andmotoric (increased motor activity) symptoms could behypothesized to be related to stimulation affecting thelimbic, cognitive, and motoric STN regions and theirdownstream striatal and frontal processes.
96This behav-
ior could be mediated by initial surgical, stimulation,and/or dopaminergic effects.
Emotional Processing
Emotional reactivity, or excessive mood-congruent
emotional responses to minor triggers, is common fol-lowing STN DBS surgery and was identiﬁed in 75% ofSTN stimulation patients.
30
Observations of emotional reactivity, euphoria, and
changes in social adjustment have led to investigationson the effect of STN stimulation on emotional process-ing. For instance, emotional processing during STNstimulation was studied utilizing a mood-induction par-adigm of exposure to differing facial emotional expres-sions.
97Consistent with the observation of increased
emotional reactivity, the ON stimulation/ offmedication
state was associated with enhanced emotional experienceand recall of emotionally valenced immediate memory incomparison to the OFF stimulation/ offmedication state.
Nonverbal information processing was investigated in
two studies using an emotional facial expression recog-nition paradigm.
98Stimulation was associated with a
decline in anger recognition and a decline in sadness andanger recognition was found ON stimulation comparedto preoperative baseline.
99Subjects were unable to rec-
ognize this impairment. Interactions between the medial–limbic STN and the anterior cingulate and nondopamin-ergic mechanisms were implicated. In both studies, therecognition of positive emotional facial expression wasnot impaired.NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL/NEUROPSYCHIATRIC ISSUES S317
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006These studies suggest that the experience, recall, and
expression of emotion may be increased following STNstimulation; however, the recognition of negative emo-tional facial expressions and, as a corollary, the appro-priateness of response to these expressions may be im-paired. These observations were suggested to have apotential impact in social relationships that require theability to process such nonverbal cues. The relationshipbetween this impairment and the states of euphoria oremotional reactivity is not known. Regions commonlyimplicated in emotional processing include the amyg-dala, medial prefrontal cortex, and orbitofrontal cortex,which have indirect connections to the medial limbicSTN.
Affective dysregulation or disorders of emotional ex-
pression such as pathological crying or mood-incongru-ent crying associated with pseudobulbar palsy has beendescribed following STN stimulation.
100 Similar to
pathological affect observed in multiple neurological dis-orders, the symptoms responded rapidly to agents withserotonin reuptake inhibitor properties.
101Okun and col-
leagues100speculated on several mechanisms of action
including inhibition of STN output resulting in an affec-tive release phenomenon, activation of the medial limbicSTN or the connections within the zona incerta andmedial forebrain bundle to limbic circuits, and activationinvolving centers regulating facial expression in thebrainstem, hypothalamus, or thalamus. The resolutionwith a serotonin reuptake inhibitor was suggested by theauthors to affect the serotonergic dorsal raphe projec-tions potentially involved in the integration of bucco–oral–facial activity. That these symptoms are infrequentsuggests that electrode placement may be playing a role.
Response Inhibition
Impairments in response inhibition following STN
stimulation have been recently demonstrated by abnor-malities in the interference arm of the Stroop task.
21,22
This observation could explain the behavioral symptomsof disinhibition,
24emotional reactivity,30and potentially
of the emotional and cognitive domains of hypomanicsymptoms, which may reﬂect impaired inhibitory pro-cesses in the early postoperative period. For instance,hypomania may be due to excessive dopamine stimula-tion or STN stimulation, resulting in downstream impair-ments of medial frontal and inhibitory functioning invulnerable individuals.
102The disinhibition of underly-
ing vulnerabilities including that of premorbid mooddisorders or personality traits may also help explain theobservation of the range of psychiatric symptoms (suchas dysphoria and hypomania) following STN DBS.Hedonistic Homeostatic Dysregulation
or Levodopa Abuse
Excessive (or inappropriate) levodopa use in the post-
operative period for its subjective euphorigenic effectrather than its motor effect has been reported as casereports. Three patients have been described with a pre-operative history of levodopa abuse who required limi-tations on the postoperative dose of levodopa.
18,30 How-
ever, recently the postoperative outcomes of two patientswith preoperative histories of severe levodopa abuse ordopamine dysregulation syndrome were reported follow-ing STN stimulation.
103One patient had postoperative
transient alcohol abuse symptoms but the outcomes ofthe two patients were otherwise unremarkable. The pa-tients were characterized by a younger age of PD onset,shorter duration of PD, and high motivation to ceaseself-medication. The dose of levodopa was dramaticallyreduced immediately after surgery. The replacement ofthe pulsatile administration of high doses of levodopawith continuous stimulation was hypothesized to play astabilizing role in decreasing the addictive behaviors.Decreasing the pulsatile administration of levodopa maydecrease the experience of negative emotional states anddecrease the abnormal sensitization of motivationalsymptoms associated with the meso–striato–limbic sys-tem.
102A study investigating cognitive measures in post-
operative PD patients offmedications did not demon-
strate any group differences in a gambling task orreward-learning paradigm either ON or OFF STN stim-ulation. This outcome suggests that STN stimulation perse does not worsen these cognitive measures, which maybe implicated in substance use disorders; however, aspreoperative measures were not obtained, changes withrespect to the preoperative state were not reported. Giventhe differences in postoperative outcomes between thecase reports,
18,30 caution should be exercised with these
patients pending further studies of predictive outcomefactors.
Obsessive–Compulsive Symptoms
Obsessive– compulsive disorder symptoms were doc-
umented to improve in case reports of PD patients withSTN stimulation localized in the anteromedial STN andzona incerta.
104,105 Obsessive– compulsive symptom
scores were reported to improve in patients followingSTN DBS.
15However, the potentially confounding vari-
able of depression was not examined. Furthermore,
whether the prevalence of comorbid obsessive– compul-sive symptoms is elevated in PD is not clear.
106 –109S318 V. VOON ET AL.
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006Apathy
Apathy is a common postoperative symptoms in the
long term and has been reported to occur between 12%and 25% in 3 to 5 years after STN stimulationsurgery.
18,26
Apathy is deﬁned as decreased responses to internal
and external stimulation. In the general PD population,apathy has been reported between 16.5% and 42%.
1,110
Apathy, understood as a distinct clinical syndrome, alsohas overlaps with depression, hedonic tone, personality
traits, and cognitive function. In the general PD popula-tion, apathy has been associated with cognitive dysfunc-tion, particularly executive dysfunction, rather than de-pression.
110Apathy in neuropsychiatric disorders and in
PD has been reported to respond to dopaminergic med-ications implicating an underlying dopaminergicetiology.
111,112
The limbic cortico–striato–thalamo– cortical
(CSTC) loop projecting to the anterior cingulate hasbeen implicated and bilateral lesions to the anteriorcingulate or globus pallidus are reported to be associ-ated with symptoms of apathy.
112However, a study
comparing apathy states both ON and OFF stimulationfound an improvement in group scores of self-reportedapathy with ON stimulation.
113The patients with im-
provements in apathy had a shorter disease durationand less severe parkinsonism compared to those with-out improvements. However, conclusions from thestudy are limited by the lack of preoperative assess-
ment of apathy, limitations due to the self-report na-ture of the Apathy Scale, and limitations of the use ofsuch a scale to assess transient acute states induced bychanges in stimulation.
Similarly, transient apathy early in the postoperative
period is commonly part of the dopaminergic or psycho-stimulant withdrawal syndrome
114,115 and responds to
increasing levodopa. Levodopa administration and acute
STN stimulation have similar subjective effects.96Apa-
thy can also occur in the context of postoperativedepression.
In contrast, more permanent symptoms of apathy late
in the postoperative period may be more likely related tounderlying frontal dysexecutive symptoms
18,26 related to
the neurodegenerative process of PD. STN stimulationappears to act on motor regions mediated by dopaminer-gic systems but has a more variable effect on the limbicregions mediated by dopamine.
26Apathy associated with
cognitive deﬁcits may also be mediated by nondopam-inergic or neurodegenerative etiologies.Visual Hallucinations
New-onset visual hallucinations (VHs) were described
following STN DBS responding to decreases in levo-dopa; recurrence of hallucinations 3 years later was time-locked with stimulation of an electrode within the zona
incerta.
116The recurrent VH responded to decreases in
stimulation and to clozapine. Proposed etiologies in-cluded stimulation affecting the medial limbic STN, theventral tegmental area (VTA) projections, or serotoner-gic ﬁbers projecting to the frontal cortex. The cortico–striato–thalamo– cortical loop involving area TE of theinferotemporal cortex has also been implicated in VH.
117
However, connections to the STN have not yet beendemonstrated. Indeed, late-onset hallucinations appear tobe more likely to be associated with the underlying PDprocess potentially interacting with increases in dopami-nergic medications given its association in patients withcognitive deﬁcits
18and may reﬂect underlying progres-
sion of nondopaminergic pathology.
The role of preoperative symptoms remains to be
clariﬁed. A survey of patients presenting for STN stim-ulation revealed a preoperative history of hallucinationsor delusions in 35% of patients.
84The decrease in med-
ications following STN stimulation presumably de-creases the stimulation of dopaminergic receptors out-
side of motor pathways and in theory should decrease
postoperative psychotic symptoms. However, hallucina-tions may have nondopaminergic etiologies includingserotonin and acetylcholine and furthermore may be as-sociated with cognitive decline, aspects of which are notmodiﬁable with stimulation. As such, whether patientswith a history of preoperative psychotic symptoms,which may be a marker for cognitive decline, are atgreater risk of postoperative neurobehavioral symptomsis not known.
Anxiety
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) was diagnosed
retrospectively in 18 of 24 patients with PD (75%) fol-lowing STN DBS in one study, 17 of whom had apreoperative history of GAD. Ten patients (42%) had aspeciﬁc fear that the stimulator would suddenly fail.
34
The extent to which these symptoms overlap with thoseof other comorbid psychiatric disorders is not known.However, overall group anxiety rating scores have beenreported in some studies to improve signiﬁcantly onanxiety measurements,
23,28 although speciﬁcity of the
symptoms was not reported.NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL/NEUROPSYCHIATRIC ISSUES S319
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006Dementia and Cognition
Dementia meeting DSM criteria was observed in only
3 patients (7%) in an uncontrolled 5-year outcome studyof 42 of 49 original patients prospectively studied fol-lowing STN DBS.
18That this ﬁgure is lower than de-
mentia in the general PD population may reﬂect selectionbias since patients with severe cognitive deﬁcits areexcluded from DBS. Although the evolution of dementiahas not been compared in DBS and unoperated PDgroups, other cognitive changes have been studied moreextensively (see prior section on cognitive outcomes).
The pathophysiology of cognitive changes after DBS
remains largely a matter of speculation. One might arguethat an anatomical basis for cognitive changes with STNstimulation is plausible given that the STN has beenobserved to have more widespread connections withbasal ganglia and cortical areas than once thought, andthat the segregated cortico– basal ganglionic limbic, as-sociative, and motor circuits may communicate via openelements within these circuits.
88,118 –120 Furthermore, it is
a simple matter to argue that current spread from segre-gated motor circuits to adjacent limbic and associate
circuits entrain cortical changes downstream that wouldbe expected to cause cognitive changes. Indeed, func-tional imaging studies suggest that STN DBS is associ-
ated with metabolic alterations in cortical areas extend-ing beyond motor and supplementary motor regions, andspeciﬁcally those areas that are part of the associativeand limbic circuits.
121,122 For example, PET activation
studies have demonstrated that STN and GPi stimulationresults in increased activation in the supplementary mo-tor area (SMA), dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC),
and anterior cingulate during random joystick move-
ments.
123Inferences regarding the potential pathophysi-
ology of cognitive changes observed following DBS canbe drawn by combining ﬁndings from the functionalimaging and stimulation literatures. Jahanshahi and col-leagues
22demonstrated that acute stimulation of the STN
resulted in improvements in several executive functiontasks. These data, in combination with the PET ﬁndings,suggest that DBS might “release the brake” in PD andresult in improvements in aspects of executive functionpresumably related to increased activation of DLPFCand other frontal regions. Conversely, Jahanshahi andcolleagues
22found that DBS in the STN can also result
in increased difﬁculty on cognitive tasks that requirebehavioral changes in response to novel contexts.
124
These latter ﬁndings might be driven via the indirectCSTC motor circuit, whereas the facilitatory effect onDLPFC function might reﬂect greater involvement of the
direct CSTC motor circuit.
A few studies have provided additional insight into the
pathophysiology of verbal ﬂuency changes, though thestudies’ results appear to be vexingly contradictory. Onthe one hand, a functional neuroimaging study found thatstimulation reduced verbal ﬂuency, and that stimulation-related metabolic changes (inferior frontal and temporal)were correlated with verbal ﬂuency performance differ-ences during and without stimulation.
125On the other
hand, clinical studies comparing verbal ﬂuency with andwithout stimulation after surgery have generally failed toﬁnd differences,
13,49 even though declines are common
between presurgical baseline and postoperative assess-ment. In addition, a 3-year follow-up study observed adecline in ﬂuency between preoperative baseline and 1year, but no further decline between the ﬁrst and thirdyears,
26suggesting that the change is unlikely to be due
to disease progression. How stimulation, changes inmedication, and microlesion effects might interact toproduce verbal ﬂuency changes remains to be deter-mined. More detailed theoretically driven studies areneeded to tease out the underlying neurophysiologicalprocesses involved in cognitive changes following DBS.
PREOPERATIVE AND POSTOPERATIVE
MANAGEMENT OF NEUROBEHAVIORAL
SYMPTOMS
Treatment algorithms for the preoperative assessment
and postoperative management of neurobehavioralsymptoms associated with stimulation for PD are pre-sented in Tables 4 and 5, respectively. The algorithmsare most relevant for STN stimulation given the potentialinteractions between medication changes and stimula-tion. The algorithms are based on expert opinion giventhe limited published literature on this topic.
CONCLUSIONS
A common evolution of cognitive or psychiatric
symptoms appears to emerge following STN stimulation.In the short term following surgery, symptoms may bemore frequent due to signiﬁcant changes in dopaminer-gic medications, the effects of a life-changing event, andpotentially stimulation-related effects. However, over thelong term, with chronic stimulation replacing the pulsa-tile effects of dopaminergic medications, fewer but qual-itatively different symptoms emerge. As patients arefollowed beyond a decade, dealing with the effects ofnatural disease progression, increasing dopaminergicmedications, progressive cognitive decline, and a differ-S320 V. VOON ET AL.
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006ing set of psychosocial concerns or disappointments will
create another set of unique challenges.
Information is beginning to emerge on potential dif-
ferences between STN and GPi stimulation. However, atpresent the evidence is inconclusive. Some studies sug-
gest that adverse neuropsychiatric events may be morecommon in the STN compared to GPi patients. Alterna-tively, some neuropsychiatric symptoms may be moreTABLE 4. Potential areas for preoperative psychiatric assessment for deep brain stimulation for Parkinson’s disease
Depression: current (see also
preoperative supplement)Moderate
1. Decision based on individual patient factors2. Consider antidepressant prophylaxis
Severe
1. Refer to psychiatry2. Surgery when depression treated3. Antidepressant prophylaxis4. Ensure antidepressants and benzodiazepines continued postoperatively5. Psychoeducation for potential relapse6. Close postoperative follow-up with adequate postoperative psychiatric management
and support
7. Gradual postoperative medication reduction8. Patients with nonmodiﬁable high suicide risk should be contraindicated from surgery
Treatment-refractory severe depression: contraindicated from surgery
Depression: past history Mild: single episode, rapid improvement with antidepressants or psychotherapy
1. Proceed to surgery
Moderate–severe: hospitalization, suicidal ideation, electroconvulsive therapy
1. Refer to psychiatry for optimization of treatment2. Psychoeducation for potential relapse3. Ensure adequate postoperative psychiatric management and support4. Ensure antidepressants and benzodiazepines continued postoperatively5. Close postoperative follow-up6. Gradual postoperative medication reduction
Hypomania/mania Primary bipolar disorder
1. Adequately controlled: decision based on individual patient factors and adequacy of
postoperative psychiatric management and support
2. Severe treatment refractory: contraindicated from surgery
Medication-induced hypomania/mania Past history
1. Psychoeducation of patient and family for potential relapse2. Close postoperative follow-up (e.g., contact with patient or family at least once
every 2 weeks for the ﬁrst 3 postoperative months)
Current
1. Decrease or discontinue associated medication or decrease overall dopaminergic
medication dose
2. Psychoeducation of patient and family for potential relapse3. Proceed to surgery4. Close postoperative follow-up
Suicidal ideation Referral to psychiatry for assessment of severity of ideation, need for management, and
appropriateness for surgery
Hallucinations/psychosis 1. Assessment for cognitive deﬁcits
2. Mild (good insight, infrequent, does not affect behavior): consider atypical
antipsychotic (clozapine/quetiapine) prophylaxis; decision based on individualpatient factors
3. Moderate to severe (limited insight, frequent, or affects behavior): decision
dependent on factors such as cognitive status, degree of association withdopaminergic medications (or expected improvement with decreasing dopaminergicmedications), response to atypical antipsychotics (clozapine/quetiapine), patientsupports, and access to postoperative neurobehavioral management
4. Primary severe psychotic disorder: contraindicated from surgery
Medication-related pathological
gambling or hypersexuality1. Assess potential relationship with medication (i.e., temporal association with
medication and trial of decreasing medications)
2. Decrease or discontinue implicated medications3. If preoperative changes in medications not tolerated or behaviors persist, may
proceed cautiously with surgery with informed consent on potential risk ofpersisting behavioral symptoms; decision dependent on factors such as cognitivestatus, likely association with dopaminergic medications, patient supports, capacityfor behavioral controls, and access to postoperative neurobehavioral management
Algorithms are most relevant for subthalamic stimulation given potential interactions between stimulation and medications.NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL/NEUROPSYCHIATRIC ISSUES S321
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006TABLE 5. Postoperative management for psychiatric symptoms following deep brain stimulation for Parkinson’s disease
Depression Early
1. Increase levodopa2. Antidepressants /H11006psychotherapy if not responsive or partially responsive
3. Consider trial or restart/dose increase of dopamine agonist with mood-elevating properties
(e.g., pramipexole)
4. Evaluation for suicidal ideation5. Consider psychiatric referral
Late
1. Trial of increase levodopa2. Antidepressants and/or psychotherapy if not responsive or partially responsive3. Consider trial of dopamine agonist with mood-elevating properties4. Evaluation for suicidal ideation5. Assess for primary apathy or cognitive deﬁcits6. Consider psychiatric referral
Suicidal ideation: refer to psychiatry (see section on suicidal ideation)Treatment-refractory depression: optimization of pharmacological management with adequate
dosing and duration of treatment, switching of antidepressant classes, and combinationand augmentation strategies; augmentation with atypical antipsychotics is notrecommended; safety of the use of electroconvulsive therapy in patients with implantedstimulators is not known, although a case report has been published describing the safetyand efﬁcacy of electroconvulsive therapy utilized in the treatment of depression in a PDpatient following DBS surgery
125
Hypomania/mania 1. Assess for suicidal ideation, risk-taking behaviors (driving, ﬁnances, excessive spending,
sexual behaviors): concurrent referral to psychiatry if risk-taking behaviors present forcapacity and safety assessments, potential hospitalization, treatment
2. Assess for necessity for treatment
Mild: time-limited, none of the above behaviors, responsive to interventions
1. No treatment required2. Consider decreasing dopaminergic medications or decreasing stimulation
Persistent or moderate to severe
1. Decrease dopaminergic medications or decrease stimulation2. Discontinue antidepressants3. Clozapine and/or mood stabilizer (carbamezapine, valproic acid)
Apathy Early
1. Increase levodopa2. Assess for depression (including dysthymia, subsyndromal or minor depression)3. Antidepressant if depression present
Late
1. Trial of increasing levodopa2. Assess for depression (including dysthymia, subsyndromal or minor depression)3. Antidepressant if present or trial of antidepressant if uncertain4. Assess for cognitive status
a. Cholinesterase inhibitor if dementia presentb. Caregiver psychoeducation on apathy symptomsc. Multidisciplinary approach for dementia management
Suicidal ideation 1. Referral to psychiatry (note that the management of comorbid psychiatric symptoms is
affected by dopaminergic withdrawal symptoms and the presence of stimulation; seeappropriate sections for management)
2. Assessment for postoperative depression, hypomania/mania, psychotic symptoms with
management as outlined in previous sections
3. Standard psychiatric management of suicidal ideation
Hallucinations/psychosis 1. Adjustment of antiparkinsonian medications
2. Trial of decreasing stimulation parameters3. Atypical antipsychotics if needed: clozapine or quetiapine4. Assessment for cognitive deﬁcits: cholinesterase inhibitors if dementia present
Pathological gambling/hypersexuality 1. Decrease or discontinue any implicated dopaminergic medication (e.g., dopamine agonist)
and/or decrease total dopaminergic medication dose
2. Rule out medication- or stimulation-related hypomania/mania (see management of
postoperative hypomania/mania)
3. Trial of decreasing stimulation4. Consider atypical antipsychotics (clozapine or quetiapine)5. Multidisciplinary addiction management
Algorithms are most relevant for subthalamic stimulation given potential interactions between stimulation and medications.S322 V. VOON ET AL.
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006likely to be improved by STN stimulation since it affords
a greater reduction or elimination of dopaminergic med-ications and STN stimulation itself may play a role inimproving certain symptoms (e.g., obsessive– compul-sive symptoms). Thus, pending the outcomes of largerwell-documented randomized controlled studies, preop-erative neuropsychiatric comorbidity may 1 day play arole in target selection.
The postoperative cognitive and psychiatric states fol-
lowing stimulation for PD are poorly understood andunderstudied. Patients with severe PD who undergoDBS, particularly in the STN, provide a unique oppor-tunity to study potential biological and psychosocialvariables underlying several cognitive and psychiatricsymptoms prospectively. Such studies can provide fur-ther insight not only into symptoms associated with PD,but also into drug withdrawal mechanisms and poten-tially mood, addiction, and behavioral disorders unre-lated to PD. The range of cognitive and psychiatricsymptoms observed in PD patients following DBS andthe paucity of available literature provides a fertileground for further pathophysiological and clinicalstudies.
Stimulation for advanced PD is effective and safe
for the vast majority of well-selected patients. The
majority of the observed psychiatric symptoms is tran-
sient and manageable and ideally, if appropriatelyunderstood and managed, preventable. Studies with
appropriate control groups with advanced PD on highdoses of medications would place these observationsinto further context. This article is intended as a com-panion to the preoperative and postoperative issuespapers in this supplement on DBS for PD. Furtherinformation on cognitive and behavioral clinical issuescan be found elsewhere in this issue.
Acknowledgments: We gratefully acknowledge the assis-
tance of Dr. Jean Saint-Cyr and Dr. Jerome Yelnik in theircomments on the anatomical table.
REFERENCES
1. Aarsland D, Larsen JP, Lim NG, et al. Range of neuropsychiatric
disturbances in patients with Parkinson’s disease. J Neurol Neu-rosurg Psychiatry 1999;67:492– 496.
2. Zgaljardic DJ, Borod JC, Foldi NS, Mattis P. A review of the
cognitive and behavioral sequelae of Parkinson’s disease: rela-
tionship to frontostriatal circuitry. Cogn Behav Neurol 2003;16:193–210.
3. Evans AH, Lees AJ. Dopamine dysregulation syndrome in Par-
kinson’s disease. Curr Opin Neurol 2004;17:393–398.
4. Deep-brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus or the pars
interna of the globus pallidus in Parkinson’s disease. N Engl
J Med 2001;345:956 –963.5. Volkmann J, Allert N, Voges J, Weiss PH, Freund HJ, Sturm V.
Safety and efﬁcacy of pallidal or subthalamic nucleus stimulationin advanced PD. Neurology 2001;56:548 –551.
6. Anderson VC, Burchiel KJ, Hogarth P, et al., Pallidal versus
subthalamic deep brain stimulation in Parkinson’s disease. ArchNeurol 2005;62:554 –560
7. Rodriguez-Oroz MC, Obeso JA, Lang AE, et al., Bilateral deep
brain stimulation in Parkinson’s disease: a multicenter study with4 years followup. Brain 2005;128;2240 –2249.
8. Volkmann J, Allert N, Voges J, Weiss PH, Freund HJ, Sturm V.
Safety and efﬁcacy of pallidal or subthalamic nucleus stimulationin advanced PD. Neurology 2001;56:548 –551.
9. Krack P, Fraix V, Mendes A, Benabid AL, Pollak P. Postopera-
tive management of subthalamic nucleus stimulation for Parkin-son’s disease. Mov Disord 2002;17(Suppl. 3):S188 –S197.
10. Fields JA, Tro ¨ster AI. Cognitive outcomes after deep brain stim-
ulation for Parkinson’s disease: a review of initial studies andrecommendations for future research. Brain Cogn 2000;42:268 –293.
11. Woods SP, Fields JA, Tro ¨ster AI. Neuropsychological sequelae
of subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation in Parkinson’sdisease: a critical review. Neuropsychol Rev 2002;12:111–126.
12. Moretti R, Torre P, Antonello RM, et al. Neuropsychological
changes after subthalamic nucleus stimulation: a 12 month fol-low-up in nine patients with Parkinson’s disease. ParkinsonismRelat Disord 2003;10:73–79.
13. Morrison CE, Borod JC, Perrine K, et al. Neuropsychological func-
tioning following bilateral subthalamic nucleus stimulation in Par-kinson’s disease. Arch Clin Neuropsychol 2004;19:165–181.
14. Gironell A, Kulisevsky J, Rami L, Fortuny N, Garcia-Sanchez C,
Pascual-Sedano B. Effects of pallidotomy and bilateral subtha-lamic stimulation on cognitive function in Parkinson disease: acontrolled comparative study. J Neurol 2003;250:917–923.
15. Alegret M, Junque C, Valldeoriola F, et al. Effects of bilateral
subthalamic stimulation on cognitive function in Parkinson dis-ease. Arch Neurol 2001;58:1223–1227.
16. Ardouin C, Pillon B, Peiffer E, et al. Bilateral subthalamic or
pallidal stimulation for Parkinson’s disease affects neither mem-ory nor executive functions: a consecutive series of 62 patients.Ann Neurol 1999;46:217–223.
17. Burchiel KJ, Anderson VC, Favre J, Hammerstad JP. Comparison
of pallidal and subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation foradvanced Parkinson’s disease: results of a randomized, blindedpilot study. Neurosurgery 1999;45:1375–1382.
18. Krack P, Batir A, Van Blercom N, et al. Five-year follow-up of
bilateral stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus in advanced Par-kinson’s disease. N Engl J Med 2003;349:1925–1934.
19. Perozzo P, Rizzone M, Bergamasco B, et al. Deep brain stimu-
lation of the subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson’s disease: compar-ison of pre- and postoperative neuropsychological evaluation.J Neurol Sci 2001;192:9 –15.
20. Pillon B, Ardouin C, Damier P, et al. Neuropsychological
changes between “OFF” and “ON” STN or GPi stimulation inParkinson’s disease. Neurology 2000;55:411– 418.
21. Witt K, Pulkowski U, Herzog J, et al. Deep brain stimulation of
the subthalamic nucleus improves cognitive ﬂexibility but im-pairs response inhibition in Parkinson disease. Arch Neurol 2004;61:697–700.
22. Jahanshahi M, Ardouin CM, Brown RG, et al. The impact of deep
brain stimulation on executive function in Parkinson’s disease.Brain 2000;123(Pt. 6):1142–1154.
23. Daniele A, Albanese A, Contarino MF, et al. Cognitive and
behavioural effects of chronic stimulation of the subthalamicnucleus in patients with Parkinson’s disease. J Neurol NeurosurgPsychiatry 2003;74:175–182.
24. Saint-Cyr JA, Trepanier LL, Kumar R, Lozano AM, Lang AE.
Neuropsychological consequences of chronic bilateral stimula-NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL/NEUROPSYCHIATRIC ISSUES S323
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006tion of the subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson’s disease. Brain
2000;123(Pt. 10):2091–2108.
25. Berney A, Vingerhoets F, Perrin A, et al. Effect on mood of
subthalamic DBS for Parkinson’s disease: a consecutive series of24 patients. Neurology 2002;59:1427–1429.
26. Funkiewiez A, Ardouin C, Caputo E, et al. Long term effects of
bilateral subthalamic nucleus stimulation on cognitive function,mood, and behaviour in Parkinson’s disease. J Neurol NeurosurgPsychiatry 2004;75:834 – 839.
27. Moro E, Scerrati M, Romito LM, Roselli R, Tonali P, Albanese
A. Chronic subthalamic nucleus stimulation reduces medicationrequirements in Parkinson’s disease. Neurology 1999;53:85–90.
28. Dujardin K, Defebvre L, Krystkowiak P, Blond S, Destee A.
Inﬂuence of chronic bilateral stimulation of the subthalamic nu-cleus on cognitive function in Parkinson’s disease. J Neurol2001;248:603– 611.
29. Trepanier LL, Kumar R, Lozano AM, Lang AE, Saint-Cyr JA.
Neuropsychological outcome of GPi pallidotomy and GPi or STNdeep brain stimulation in Parkinson’s disease. Brain Cogn 2000;42:324 –347.
30. Houeto JL, Mesnage V, Mallet L, et al. Behavioural disorders,
Parkinson’s disease and subthalamic stimulation. J Neurol Neu-rosurg Psychiatry 2002;72:701–707.
31. Hariz MI, Johansson F, Shamsgovara P, Johansson E, Hariz GM,
Fagerlund M. Bilateral subthalamic nucleus stimulation in a par-kinsonian patient with preoperative deﬁcits in speech and cogni-tion: persistent improvement in mobility but increased depend-ency—a case study. Mov Disord 2000;15:136 –139.
32. Hershey T, Revilla FJ, Wernle A, Gibson PS, Dowling JL,
Perlmutter JS. Stimulation of STN impairs aspects of cognitivecontrol in PD. Neurology 2004;62:1110 –1114.
33. Molinuevo JL, Valldeoriola F, Tolosa E, et al. Levodopa with-
drawal after bilateral subthalamic nucleus stimulation in ad-vanced Parkinson disease. Arch Neurol 2000;57:983–988.
34. Houeto JL, Mesnage V, Mallet L, et al. Behavioural disorders,
Parkinson’s disease and subthalamic stimulation. J Neurol Neu-rosurg Psychiatry 2002;72:701–707.
35. Iansek R, Rosenfeld JV, Huxham FE. Deep brain stimulation of
the subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson’s disease. Med J Aust2002;177:142–146.
36. Tavella A, Bergamasco B, Bosticco E, et al. Deep brain stimu-
lation of the subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson’s disease: long-term follow-up. Neurol Sci 2002;23(Suppl. 2):S111–S112.
37. Vesper J, Klostermann F, Stockhammer F, Funk T, Brock M. Re-
sults of chronic subthalamic nucleus stimulation for Parkinson’sdisease: a 1-year follow-up study. Surg Neurol 2002;57:306 –311.
38. Herzog J, Volkmann J, Krack P, et al. Two-year follow-up of
subthalamic deep brain stimulation in Parkinson’s disease. MovDisord 2003;18:1332–1337.
39. Landi A, Parolin M, Piolti R, et al. Deep brain stimulation for the
treatment of Parkinson’s disease: the experience of the neurosurgicaldepartment in Monza. Neurol Sci 2003;24(Suppl. 1):S43–S44.
40. Tamma F, Rampini P, Egidi M, et al. Deep brain stimulation for
Parkinson’s disease: the experience of the Policlinico–San PaoloGroup in Milan. Neurol Sci 2003;24(Suppl. 1):S41–S42.
41. Romito LM, Raja M, Daniele A, et al. Transient mania with
hypersexuality after surgery for high frequency stimulation of thesubthalamic nucleus in Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2002;17:1371–1374.
42. Daniele A, Albanese A, Contarino MF, et al. Cognitive and
behavioural effects of chronic stimulation of the subthalamicnucleus in patients with Parkinson’s disease. J Neurol NeurosurgPsychiatry 2003;74:175–182.
43. Doshi PK, Chhaya N, Bhatt MH. Depression leading to attempted
suicide after bilateral subthalamic nucleus stimulation for Parkin-son’s disease. Mov Disord 2002;17:1084 –1085.44. Burkhard PR, Vingerhoets FJ, Berney A, et al. Suicide after
successful deep brain stimulation for movement disorders. Neu-rology 2004;63:2170 –2172.
45. Voon V, Moro E, Saint-Cyr JA, Lozano AM, Lang AE. Psychi-
atric symptoms following surgery for Parkinson’s disease with an
emphasis on subthalamic stimulation. In: Anderson KE, Weiner
WJ, Lang AE, editors. Advances in neurology, behavioral neu-rology of movement disorders, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: LippincottWilliams and Wilkins; 2005. p 147.
46. Rodriguez-Oroz MC, Gorospe A, Guridi J, et al. Bilateral deep
brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson’s dis-ease. Neurology 2000;55(Suppl. 6):S45–S51.
47. Martinez-Martin P, Valldeoriola F, Tolosa E, et al. Bilateral
subthalamic nucleus stimulation and quality of life in advanced
Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2002;17:372–377.
48. Ostergaard K, Sunde N, Dupont E. Effects of bilateral stimulation
of the subthalamic nucleus in patients with severe Parkinson’s
disease and motor ﬂuctuations. Mov Disord 2002;17:693–700.
49. Pillon B, Ardouin C, Damier P, et al. Neuropsychological
changes between “OFF” and “ON” STN or GPi stimulation inParkinson’s disease. Neurology 2000;55:411– 418.
50. Dujardin K, Defebvre L, Krystkowiak P, Blond S, Destee A.
Inﬂuence of chronic bilateral stimulation of the subthalamic nu-cleus on cognitive function in Parkinson’s disease. J Neurol
2001;248:603– 611.
51. Baron MS, Vitek JL, Bakay RA, et al. Treatment of advanced
Parkinson’s disease by posterior GPi pallidotomy: 1-year results
of a pilot study. Ann Neurol 1996;40:355–366.
52. Bezerra ML, Martinez JV, Nasser JA. Transient acute depression
induced by high-frequency deep-brain stimulation. N Engl J Med
1999;341:1003.
53. Vitek JL, Bakay RA, Freeman A, et al. Randomized trial of
pallidotomy versus medical therapy for Parkinson’s disease. Ann
Neurol 2003;53:558 –569.
54. Fields JA, Tro ¨ster AI, Wilkinson SB, Pahwa R, Koller WC.
Cognitive outcome following staged bilateral pallidal stimulation
for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease. Clin Neurol Neurosurg1999;101:182–188.
55. Vingerhoets G, van der Linden C, Lannoo E, et al. Cognitive
outcome after unilateral pallidal stimulation in Parkinson’s dis-ease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1999;66:297–304.
56. Tro ¨ster AI, Fields JA, Wilkinson SB, et al. Unilateral pallidal
stimulation for Parkinson’s disease: neurobehavioral functioningbefore and 3 months after electrode implantation. Neurology
1997;49:1078 –1083.
57. Volkmann J, Allert N, Voges J, Sturm V, Schnitzler A, Freund
HJ. Long-term results of bilateral pallidal stimulation in Parkin-
son’s disease. Ann Neurol 2004;55:871– 875.
58. Tro ¨ster AI, Woods SP, Fields JA, Hanisch C, Beatty WW. De-
clines in switching underlie verbal ﬂuency changes after unilat-
eral pallidal surgery in Parkinson’s disease. Brain Cogn 2002;50:207–217.
59. Dujardin K, Krystkowiak P, Defebvre L, Blond S, Destee A. A case
of severe dysexecutive syndrome consecutive to chronic bilateralpallidal stimulation. Neuropsychologia 2000;38:1305–1315.
60. Ardouin C, Pillon B, Peiffer E, et al. Bilateral subthalamic or
pallidal stimulation for Parkinson’s disease affects neither mem-ory nor executive functions: a consecutive series of 62 patients.
Ann Neurol 1999;46:217–223.
61. Higginson C, Fields J, Tro ¨ster A. Which symptoms of anxiety
diminish after surgical interventions for Parkinson disease? Neu-
ropsychiatry Neuropsychol Behav Neurol 2001;14:117–121.
62. Miyawaki E, Perlmutter JS, Tro ¨ster AI, Videen TO, Koller WC.
The behavioral complications of pallidal stimulation: a case re-
port. Brain Cogn 2000;42:417– 434.S324 V. VOON ET AL.
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 200663. Roane DM, Yu M, Feinberg TE, Rogers JD. Hypersexuality after
pallidal surgery in Parkinson disease. Neuropsychiatry Neuropsy-chol Behav Neurol 2002;15:247–251.
64. Krause M, Fogel W, Heck A, et al. Deep brain stimulation for the
treatment of Parkinson’s disease: subthalamic nucleus versus globuspallidus internus. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2001;70:464 – 470.
65. Hugdahl K, Wester K. Neurocognitive correlates of stereotactic
thalamotomy and thalamic stimulation in Parkinsonian patients.Brain Cogn 2000;42:231–252.
66. Woods SP, Fields JA, Lyons KE, et al. Neuropsychological and
quality of life changes following unilateral thalamic deep brainstimulation in Parkinson’s disease: a one-year follow-up. ActaNeurochir 2001;143:1273–1277.
67. Tro ¨ster AI, Wilkinson SB, Fields JA, et al. Chronic electrical
stimulation of the left ventrointermediate (Vim) thalamic nucleusfor the treatment of pharmcotherapy-resistant Parkinson’s dis-ease: a differential impact on access to semantic and episodicmemory? Brain Cogn 1998;38:125–149.
68. Schuurman PR, Bruins J, Merkus MP, Bosch DA, Speelman JD.
A comparison of neuropsychological effects of thalamotomy andthalamic stimulation. Neurology 2002;59:1232–1239.
69. Woods SP, Conover E, Carey CL, Parsons TD, Tro ¨ster AI.
Statistical power of studies examining the cognitive effects ofsubthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation in Parkinson’s dis-ease. Clin Neuropsychol 2006;20:27–38.
70. Alegret M, Vendrell P, Junque C, et al. Effects of unilateral
posteroventral pallidotomy on “on– off” cognitive ﬂuctuations inParkinson’s disease. Neuropsychologia 2000;38:628 – 633.
71. Green J, Barnhart H. The impact of lesion laterality on neuropsy-
chological change following posterior pallidotomy: a review ofcurrent ﬁndings. Brain Cogn 2000;42:379 –398.
72. York MK, Levin HS, Grossman RG, Hamilton WJ. Neuropsy-
chological outcome following unilateral pallidotomy. Brain 1999;122(Pt. 12):2209 –2220.
73. Sawrie SM, Chelune GJ, Naugle RI, Luders HO. Empirical meth-
ods for assessing meaningful neuropsychological change follow-ing epilepsy surgery. J Int Neuropsychol Soc 1996;2:556 –564.
74. Schmand B, de Bie RM, Koning-Haanstra M, de Smet JS, Speel-
man JD, van Zomeren AH. Unilateral pallidotomy in PD: acontrolled study of cognitive and behavioral effects—the Neth-erlands Pallidotomy Study (NEPAS) group. Neurology 2000;54:1058 –1064.
75. Burn DJ, Tro ¨ster AI. Neuropsychiatric complications of medical
and surgical therapies for Parkinson’s disease. J Geriatr Psychi-atry Neurol 2004;17:172–180.
76. Francel P, Ryder K, Wetmore J, et al. Deep brain stimulation for
Parkinson’s disease: association between stimulation parametersand cognitive performance. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg 2004;82:191–193.
77. Okun MS, Green J, Saben R, Gross R, Foote KD, Vitek JL. Mood
changes with deep brain stimulation of STN and GPi: results of apilot study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2003;74:1584 –1586.
78. Bejjani BP, Damier P, Arnulf I, et al. Transient acute depression
induced by high-frequency deep-brain stimulation. N Engl J Med1999;340:1476 –1480.
79. Brown RG. Behavioural disorders, Parkinson’s disease, and subtha-
lamic stimulation. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2002;72:689.
80. Agid Y, Arnulf I, Bejjani P, et al. Parkinson’s disease is a
neuropsychiatric disorder. Adv Neurol 2003;91:365–370.
81. Krack P, Ardouin C, Funkiewiez A, et al. What is the inﬂuence of
STN stimulation on the limbic loop? In: Kultas-Ilinsky K II,editor. Basal Ganglia and Thalamus in Health and MovementDisorders. New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers;2001. p 333–340.
82. Cummings JL. Depression and Parkinson’s disease: a review.
Am J Psychiatry 1992;149:443– 454.83. Dooneief G, Mirabello E, Bell K, Marder K, Stern Y, Mayeux R.
An estimate of the incidence of depression in idiopathic Parkin-son’s disease. Arch Neurol 1992;49:305–307.
84. Voon V, Saint-Cyr JA, Lozano AM, Moro E, Poon Y, Lang AE.
Psychiatric symptoms in Parkinson’s patients presenting for deepbrain stimulation. J Neurosurg 2005;103:246 –251.
85. Giovannoni G, O’Sullivan JD, Turner K, Manson AJ, Lees
AJ. Hedonistic homeostatic dysregulation in patients with Par-kinson’s disease on dopamine replacement therapies. J NeurolNeurosurg Psychiatry 2000;68:423– 428.
86. Rektorova I, Rektor I, Bares M, et al. Pramipexole and pergolide
in the treatment of depression in Parkinson’s disease: a nationalmulticentre prospective randomized study. Eur J Neurol 2003;10:399 – 406.
87. Yelnik J. Functional anatomy of the basal ganglia. Mov Disord
2002;17(Suppl. 3):S15–S21.
88. Parent A, Hazrati LN. Functional anatomy of the basal ganglia: II,
the place of subthalamic nucleus and external pallidum in basalganglia circuitry. Brain Res Brain Res Rev 1995;20:128 –154.
89. Stefurak T, Mikulis D, Mayberg H, et al. Deep brain stimulation
for Parkinson’s disease dissociates mood and motor circuits: afunctional MRI case study. Mov Disord 2003;18:1508 –1516.
90. Kumar R, Lozano AM, Sime E, Halket E, Lang AE. Comparative
effects of unilateral and bilateral subthalamic nucleus deep brainstimulation. Neurology 1999;53:561–566.
91. Derry PA, Wiebe S. Psychological adjustment to success and to
failure following epilepsy surgery. Can J Neurol Sci 2000;27(Suppl. 1):S116 –S120.
92. Krack P, Kumar R, Ardouin C, et al. Mirthful laughter induced by
subthalamic nucleus stimulation. Mov Disord 2001;16:867– 875.
93. Olbrisch ME, Levenson JL. Psychosocial assessment of organ
transplant candidates: current status of methodological and phil-osophical issues. Psychosomatics 1995;36:236 –243.
94. Herzog J, Reiff J, Krack P, et al. Manic episode with psychotic
symptoms induced by subthalamic nucleus stimulation in a pa-tient with Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2003;18:1382–1384.
95. Kulisevsky J, Berthier ML, Gironell A, Pascual-Sedano B, Molet
J, Pares P. Mania following deep brain stimulation for Parkin-son’s disease. Neurology 2002;59:1421–1424.
96. Funkiewiez A, Ardouin C, Krack P, et al. Acute psychotropic
effects of bilateral subthalamic nucleus stimulation and levodopain Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2003;18:524 –530.
97. Schneider F, Habel U, Volkmann J, et al. Deep brain stimulation
of the subthalamic nucleus enhances emotional processing inParkinson disease. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2003;60:296 –302.
98. Schroeder U, Kuehler A, Hennenlotter A, et al. Facial expression
recognition and subthalamic nucleus stimulation. J Neurol Neu-rosurg Psychiatry 2004;75:648 – 650.
99. Dujardin K, Blairy S, Defebvre L, et al. Subthalamic nucleus
stimulation induces deﬁcits in decoding emotional facial expres-sions in Parkinson’s disease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry2004;75:202–208.
100. Okun MS, Raju DV, Walter BL, et al. Pseudobulbar crying
induced by stimulation in the region of the subthalamic nucleus.J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2004;75:921–923.
101. Robinson RG, Parikh RM, Lipsey JR, Starkstein SE, Price TR.
Pathological laughing and crying following stroke: validation ofa measurement scale and a double-blind treatment study. Am JPsychiatry 1993;150:286 –293.
102. Lawrence AD, Evans AH, Lees AJ. Compulsive use of dopamine
replacement therapy in Parkinson’s disease: reward systems goneawry? Lancet Neurol 2003;2:595– 604.
103. Witjas TBC, Henry JM, Delﬁni M, et al. Addiction in Parkinson’s
disease: impact of subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation.Mov Disord 2005;20:1052–1055.
104. Mallet L, Mesnage V, Houeto JL, et al. Compulsions, Parkinson’s
disease, and stimulation. Lancet 2002;360:1302–1304.NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL/NEUROPSYCHIATRIC ISSUES S325
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006105. Fontaine D, Mattei V, Borg M, et al. Effect of subthalamic
nucleus stimulation on obsessive– compulsive disorder in a pa-tient with Parkinson disease: case report. J Neurosurg 2004;100:1084 –1086.
106. Alegret M, Junque C, Valldeoriola F, Vendrell P, Marti MJ,
Tolosa E. Obsessive– compulsive symptoms in Parkinson’s dis-ease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2001;70:394 –396.
107. Maia AF, Pinto AS, Barbosa ER, Menezes PR, Miguel EC.
Obsessive– compulsive symptoms, obsessive– compulsive disor-der, and related disorders in Parkinson’s disease. J Neuropsychi-atry Clin Neurosci 2003;15:371–374.
108. Muller N, Putz A, Kathmann N, Lehle R, Gunther W, Straube A.
Characteristics of obsessive– compulsive symptoms in Tourette’ssyndrome, obsessive– compulsive disorder, and Parkinson’s dis-ease. Psychiatry Res 1997;70:105–114.
109. Sharma P, Gupta N. Obsessive– compulsive phenomenon and
Parkinson’s disease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2002;72:420 – 421.
110. Pluck GC, Brown RG. Apathy in Parkinson’s disease. J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry 2002;73:636 – 642.
111. Chatterjee A, Fahn S. Methylphenidate treats apathy in Parkinson’s
disease. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 2002;14:461– 462.
112. Marin RS, Fogel BS, Hawkins J, Duffy J, Krupp B. Apathy: a
treatable syndrome. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 1995;7:23–30.
113. Czernecki V, Pillon B, Houeto JL, et al. Does bilateral stimulation
of the subthalamic nucleus aggravate apathy in Parkinson’s dis-ease? J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2005;76:775–779.
114. Krack P, Pollak P, Limousin P, et al. Subthalamic nucleus or
internal pallidal stimulation in young onset Parkinson’s disease.Brain 1998;121(Pt. 3):451– 457.
115. Kalechstein AD, Newton TF, Leavengood AH. Apathy syndrome
in cocaine dependence. Psychiatry Res 2002;109:97–100.
116. Diederich NJ, Alesch F, Goetz CG. Visual hallucinations induced
by deep brain stimulation in Parkinson’s disease. Clin Neuro-pharmacol 2000;23:287–289.
117. Middleton FA, Strick PL. The temporal lobe is a target of output
from the basal ganglia. Proc Natl Acad Sc iUSA 1996;93:8683–
8687.
118. Parent A, Levesque M, Parent M. A re-evaluation of the current
model of the basal ganglia. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2001;7:193–198.
119. Hamani C, Saint-Cyr JA, Fraser J, Kaplitt M, Lozano AM. The
subthalamic nucleus in the context of movement disorders. Brain2004;127(Pt. 1):4 –20.
120. Joel D, Weiner I. The connections of the primate subthalamic
nucleus: indirect pathways and the open-interconnected schemeof basal ganglia–thalamocortical circuitry. Brain Res Brain ResRev 1997;23:62–78.
121. Hilker R, Voges J, Weisenbach S, et al. Subthalamic nucleus
stimulation restores glucose metabolism in associative and limbiccortices and in cerebellum: evidence from a FDG-PET study inadvanced Parkinson’s disease. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2004;24:7–16.
122. Schroeder U, Kuehler A, Lange KW, et al. Subthalamic nucleus
stimulation affects a frontotemporal network: a PET study. AnnNeurol 2003;54:445– 450.
123. Limousin P, Greene J, Pollak P, et al. Changes in cerebral activity
pattern due to subthalamic nucleus or internal pallidum stimula-tion in Parkinson’s disease. Ann Neurol 1997;42:283–291.
124. Marsden CD, Obeso JA. The function of the basal ganglia and the
paradox of stereotaxic surgery in Parkinson’s disease. Brain1994;117:877– 897.
125. Chou KL, Hurtig HI, Jaggi JL, et al. Electroconvulsive therapy
for depression in a Parkinson’s disease patient with bilateralsubthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulators. Parkinsonism RelatDisord 2005;11:403– 406.126. Limousin P, Krack P, Pollak P, et al. Electrical stimulation of the
subthalamic nucleus in advanced Parkinson’s disease. N EnglJ Med 1998;339:1105–1111.
127. Lopiano L, Rizzone M, Bergamasco B, et al. Daytime sleepiness
improvement following bilateral chronic electrical stimulation ofthe subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson’s disease. Eur Neurol 2001;46:49 –50.
128. Fukuda M, Ghilardi MF, Carbon M, et al. Pallidal stimulation for
parkinsonism: improved brain activation during sequence learn-ing. Ann Neurol 2002;52:144 –152.
129. Tro ¨ster AI, Wilkinson SB, Fields JA, Miyawaki K, Koller WC.
Chronic electrical stimulation of the left ventrointermediate(Vim) thalamic nucleus for the treatment of pharmacotherapy-resistant Parkinson’s disease: a differential impact on access tosemantic and episodic memory? Brain Cogn 1998;38:125–149.
130. Alexander GE, DeLong MR, Strick PL. Parallel organization of
functionally segregated circuits linking basal ganglia and cortex.Annu Rev Neurosci 1986;9:357–381.
131. Groenewegen HJ, Berendse HW. Connections of the subthalamic
nucleus with ventral striatopallidal parts of the basal ganglia inthe rat. J Comp Neurol 1990;294:607– 622.
132. Saint-Cyr JA, Hoque T, Pereira LC, et al. Localization of clini-
cally effective stimulating electrodes in the human subthalamicnucleus on magnetic resonance imaging. J Neurosurg 2002;97:1152–1166.
133. Voges J, Volkmann J, Allert N, et al. Bilateral high-frequency
stimulation in the subthalamic nucleus for the treatment of Par-kinson disease: correlation of therapeutic effect with anatomicalelectrode position. J Neurosurg 2002;96:269 –279.
134. Yelnik J, Damier P, Demeret S, et al. Localization of stimulating
electrodes in patients with Parkinson disease by using a three-dimensional atlas-magnetic resonance imaging coregistrationmethod. J Neurosurg 2003;99:89 –99.
135. Cossette M, Levesque M, Parent A. Extrastriatal dopaminergic
innervation of human basal ganglia. Neurosci Res 1999;34:51–54.
136. Sato F, Parent M, Levesque M, Parent A. Axonal branching
pattern of neurons of the subthalamic nucleus in primates. J CompNeurol 2000;424:142–152.
137. Schroeder U, Kuehler A, Haslinger B, et al. Subthalamic nucleus
stimulation affects striato–anterior cingulate cortex circuit in aresponse conﬂict task: a PET study. Brain 2002;125(Pt. 9):1995–2004.
138. Koob GF, Nestler EJ. The neurobiology of drug addiction. In:
Salloway S, Malloy P, Cummings JL, editors. The Neuropsychi-atry of Limbic and Subcortical Disorders. Washington, DC:American Psychiatric Press; 1997. p 179.
139. Mayberg HS, Liotti M, Brannan SK, et al. Reciprocal limbic-
cortical function and negative mood: converging PET ﬁndings indepression and normal sadness. Am J Psychiatry 1999;156:675–682.
140. Freedman LJ, Insel TR, Smith Y. Subcortical projections of area
25 (subgenual cortex) of the macaque monkey. J Comp Neurol2000;421:172–188.
141. Mitrofanis J. Some certainty for the “zone of uncertainty”? ex-
ploring the function of the zona incerta. Neuroscience 2005;130:1–15.
142. Mitrofanis J, Mikuletic L. Organisation of the cortical projection
to the zona incerta of the thalamus. J Comp Neurol 1999;412:173–185.
143. Heise CE, Mitrofanis J. Evidence for a glutamatergic projection
from the zona incerta to the basal ganglia of rats. J Comp Neurol2004;468:482– 495.
144. Reardon F, Mitrofanis J. Organisation of the amygdalo–thalamic
pathways in rats. Anat Embryol (Berl) 2000;201:75– 84.
145. Orieux G, Francois C, Feger J, et al. Metabolic activity of
excitatory parafascicular and pedunculopontine inputs to the sub-S326 V. VOON ET AL.
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006thalamic nucleus in a rat model of Parkinson’s disease. Neuro-
science 2000;97:79 – 88.
146. Keating GL, Walker SC, Winn P. An examination of the effects
of bilateral excitotoxic lesions of the pedunculopontine tegmental
nucleus on responding to sucrose reward. Behav Brain Res 2002;
134:217–228.
147. Winn P. Frontal syndrome as a consequence of lesions in the
pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus: a short theoretical review.
Brain Res Bull 1998;47:551–563.
148. Ashby P, Kim YJ, Kumar R, Lang AE, Lozano AM. Neurophys-
iological effects of stimulation through electrodes in the human
subthalamic nucleus. Brain 1999;122(Pt. 10):1919 –1931.
149. Bergman H, Wichmann T, Delong MR. Reversal of experimental
parkinsonism by lesions of the subthalamic nucleus. Science
1990;249:1436 –1438.
150. Bergman H, Wichmann T, Karmon B, Delong MR. The primate
subthalamic nucleus: II, neuronal activity in the MPTP model of
parkinsonism. J Neurophysiol 1994;72:507–520.
151. Hutchison WD, Allan RJ, Opitz H, et al. Neurophysiological
identiﬁcation of the subthalamic nucleus in surgery for Parkin-
son’s disease. Ann Neurol 1998;44:622– 628.
152. Levy R, Dostrovsky JO, Lang AE, et al. Effects of apomorphine
on subthalamic nuclues and globus pallidus internus neurons in
patients with Parkinson’s disease. J Neurophysiol 2001;86:249 –260.153. Krack P, Pollak P, Limousin P, et al. Stimulation of subthalamic
nucleus alleviates tremor in Parkinson’s disease. Lancet 1997;350:1675.
154. Krack P, Pollak P, Limousin P, Benazzouz A, Deuschl G, Bena-
bid AL. From off-period dystonia to peak-dose chorea: the clin-
ical spectrum of varying subthalamic nucleus activity. Brain1999;122(Pt. 6):1133–1146.
155. Rogers D, Lees AJ, Smith E, et al. Bradyphrenia in Parkinson’s
disease and psychomotor retardation in depressive illness: anexperimental study. Brain 1987;110:761–776.
156. Mayeux R, Stern Y, Sano M, et al. Clinical and biochemical
correlates of bradyphrenia in Parkinson’s disease. Neurology1987;37:1130 –1134.
157. Gotham AM, Brown RG, Marsden CD. “Frontal” cognitive func-
tion in patients with Parkinson’s disease “ on” and “ off” levodopa.
Brain 1988;111:299 –321.
158. Dubois B, Pillon B. Cognitive deﬁcits in Parkinson’s disease.
J Neurol 1997;244:2– 8.
159. Maricle RA, Nutt JG, Valentine RJ, Carter JH. Dose-response
relationship of levodopa with mood and anxiety in ﬂuctuatingParkinson’s disease: a double-blind, placebo-controlled study.Neurology 1995;45:1757–1760.
160. Gotham AM, Brown RG, Marsden CD. Depression in Parkin-
son’s disease: a quantitative and qualitative analysis. J NeurolNeurosurg Psychiatry 1986;49:381–389.
161. Riley DE, Lang AE. The spectrum of levodopa-related ﬂuctua-
tions in Parkinson’s disease. Neurology 1993;43:1459 –1464.NEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL/NEUROPSYCHIATRIC ISSUES S327
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006