Deep Brain Stimulation: Postoperative Issues
Gu¨nther Deuschl, MD,1*Jan Herzog, MD,1Galit Kleiner-Fisman, MD,2Cynthia Kubu, PhD,3
Andres M. Lozano, MD, PhD,4Kelly E. Lyons, PhD,5Maria C. Rodriguez-Oroz, MD,6
Filippo Tamma, MD,7Alexander I. Tro ¨ster, PhD,8Jerrold L. Vitek, MD, PhD,3Jens Volkmann, MD,1
and Valerie Voon, MD9
1Department of Neurology, Christian-Albrechts-Universita ¨t Kiel, Kiel, Germany
2Department of Neurology, Philadelphia VA Hospital, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
3Center for Neurological Restoration, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio, USA
4Department of Neurosurgery, Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
5Department of Neurology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas, USA
6Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Navarra, Spain
7Department of Neurology, Ospedale San Paolo, Milano, Italy
8Department of Neurology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA
9National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA
Abstract: Numerous factors need to be taken into account
when managing a patient with Parkinson’s disease (PD) afterdeep brain stimulation (DBS). Questions such as when to beginprogramming, how to conduct a programming screen, how toassess the effects of programming, and how to titrate stimula-
tion and medication for each of the targeted sites need to be
addressed. Follow-up care should be determined, includingpatient adjustments of stimulation, timing of follow-up visitsand telephone contact with the patient, and stimulation andmedication conditions during the follow-up assessments. Amanagement plan for problems that can arise after DBS such asweight gain, dyskinesia, axial symptoms, speech dysfunction,muscle contractions, paresthesia, eyelid, ocular and visual dis-turbances, and behavioral and cognitive problems should be
developed. Long-term complications such as infection or ero-
sion, loss of effect, intermittent stimulation, tolerance, and painor discomfort can develop and need to be managed. Other
factors that need consideration are social and job-related fac-tors, development of dementia, general medical issues, andlifestyle changes. This report from the Consensus on Deep
Brain Stimulation for Parkinson’s Disease, a project commis-
sioned by the Congress of Neurological Surgeons and theMovement Disorder Society, outlines answers to a series ofquestions developed to address all aspects of DBS postopera-tive management and decision-making with a systematic over-view of the literature (until mid-2004) and by the expert opin-ion of the authors. The report has been endorsed by theScientiﬁc Issues Committee of the Movement Disorder Societyand the American Society of Stereotactic and Functional
Neurosurgery. © 2006 Movement Disorder Society
Key words: deep brain stimulation; Parkinson’s disease;
postoperative management
Table of contents
1. General management aspects
1.1. General aspects of early postoperative management1.1.1. Are there general treatment recommendations for the early
postoperative period?
1.1.2. When should DBS programming be started?1.1.3. How to proceed in assessing stimulation effects and optimizing
stimulation parameters?
1.1.4. Why is the screening session important and how should it be
approached?1.1.5. How should stimulation and medications be titrated for the three
different targets?
1.2. General aspects of follow-up1.2.1. Should patients be trained to adjust stimulation parameters?1.2.2. What are the criteria for scheduling follow-up visits and telephone
contacts after surgery?
1.2.3. Should OFF stimulation assessments be routinely done and, if so,
how long should the stimulators be turned OFF prior to the assessments?
2. Management of common postoperative problems and optimization in the
postoperative period
2.1. Management of common postoperative problems2.1.1. Management of weight gain2.1.2. Management of dyskinesias2.1.3. Management of axial symptoms2.1.4. Management of speech dysfunction2.1.5. Management of muscle contractions2.1.6. Management of paresthesia2.1.7. Management of eyelid and ocular disturbances
*Correspondence to: Dr. Gu ¨nther Deuschl, Neurologische Klinik
der Christian-Albrechts-Universita ¨t Kiel, Niemannsweg 147, Kiel
D-24105, Germany. E-mail: g.deuschl@neurologie.uni-kiel.de
Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.
com). DOI: 10.1002/mds.20957Movement Disorders
Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006, pp. S219 –S237© 2006 Movement Disorder Society
S2192.1.8. Management of visual disturbances
2.1.9. Management of behavioral and cognitive problems2.2. When is the optimal response to be expected, do patients develop
tolerance, and how should secondary deterioration be improved?
3. What are long-term complications that need neurosurgical attention?3.1. Infections and erosions3.2. Sudden loss of efﬁcacy or intermittent stimulation effects3.3. Pain and discomfort following implantation4. Long-term problems4.1. Are there speciﬁc postoperative social or job-related problems?4.2. Long-term development of dementia4.3. General medical issues4.4. Lifestyle issues
The management of a Parkinson’s disease (PD) patient
after deep brain stimulation (DBS) is complex and mul-tifaceted. The questions developed and addressed in thisarticle attempt to consider all factors that might be in-volved in the early management, follow-up care, andlong-term follow-up of PD patients undergoing DBS. Inaddition, the authors attempt to deﬁne the best practicesto manage commonly encountered problems and long-term complications of DBS.
METHODS
Search Strategy
A search of the literature from 1965 to May 2004
using Medline was completed and resulted in a total of574 articles related to DBS. The multiple searches usedthe following key words: deep brain stimulation, Parkin-son’s disease, neurostimulation, thalamic stimulation,pallidal stimulation, and subthalamic stimulation. Thesesearches were combined with those of neuropsychology,neuropsychiatry, microelectrode recording, surgicaltechnique, complications, neuroimaging, and targeting.Articles were classiﬁed as preoperative and postopera-tive issues, intraoperative issues, and neuropsychologicalissues. A PDF ﬁle was created for each of the articles thatcould be obtained. This resulted in a CD containingcopies of 522 of the articles, which was distributed toeach member of the writing committee. During the writ-ing process, the authors added an additional 87 articles inorder to provide background references for various is-sues, techniques, and measurement scales discussed inthe articles or to include articles published after May2004 that were determined to be critical in completelyaddressing a particular issue.
Process of Generating Clinical Recommendations
The writing committee was composed of neurologists,
neurosurgeons, neuropsychologists, neuropsychiatrists,and researchers with experience and expertise in DBS forParkinson’s disease. The committee was composed ofexperts from multiple centers in North America andEurope. The natural division of important issues related
to DBS was applied and participants were assigned basedon their interests and expertise to separate preoperative,surgical/intraoperative, or postoperative issues commit-tees. The steering committee formulated a series of ques-tions related to all aspects of these three areas, whichwere then reviewed and reﬁned by the committee mem-bers. Committee members were then assigned speciﬁcquestions to answer utilizing the literature compiled asdescribed above. The responses were then reviewed bythe steering committee at a separate meeting and it wasdecided to organize responses by ﬁrst reviewing the“available data”, followed by sections providing “con-clusions”, “pragmatic recommendations,” and “points tobe addressed” by future research. It is generally agreedthat there is insufﬁcient evidence in the currently avail-able literature to formulate deﬁnitive recommendationsand conclusions for most of the questions and issuescovered in the articles. Therefore, subsequently, the en-tire group discussed and revised the recommendationsduring a 3-day meeting. At this meeting, the whole group(members of all three working committees) providedfeedback and agreed on the ﬁnal conclusions to be drawnfrom available data as well as the formulation of prag-matic recommendations recognizing that many of thequestions could not be answered on the basis of currentlyavailable studies. The steering committee members thenreformulated each section and redistributed the docu-ment to their entire working committee for ﬁnal ap-proval. Whenever there were opposing or conﬂictingopinions, further discussion followed and consensus wasreached or outstanding disagreement was speciﬁcallyaddressed in the paper.
1. GENERAL MANAGEMENT ASPECTS
1.1. General Aspects of Early Postoperative
Management
1.1.1. Are There General Treatment
Recommendations for the Early Postoperative
Period?
Available Data
There are no formal studies on immediate postopera-
tive patient management. General health recommenda-tions include the systemic administration of antibioticsintraoperatively and up to the ﬁrst postoperative weekand standard monitoring such as ECG, blood pressure,and vital signs.
1Some patients have postoperative tran-
sitory confusion or agitation,2– 8particularly if mild pre-
operative cognitive impairment was present,2for which
atypical antipsychotics have been used.9In many centers,S220 G. DEUSCHL ET AL.
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006
 15318257, 2006, S14, Downloaded from https://movementdisorders.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mds.20957 by University Of Waterloo Dana Porter Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
a postoperative MRI or CT scan is done before stimula-
tor implantation to verify electrode position and to ruleout surgical complications.
3,10 –13 There is limited infor-
mation on the postoperative reintroduction of antiparkin-sonian medication.
14
Conclusions
Standard postoperative care is sufﬁcient providing the
surgery is uncomplicated; postoperative management inthe intensive care unit is not a necessity.
Pragmatic Recommendations
Postoperative antiparkinsonian treatment should be re-
started as soon as possible to relieve discomfort and limitthe risk of acute dopaminergic withdrawal and malignanthyperthermia. The postoperative levodopa equivalentdose (LED) should be the same as the presurgical doseand composed primarily of levodopa to facilitate simpletitration during programming initiation.
Confusional states generally last a few days and can be
easily managed with sedatives such as benzodiazepinesand atypical antipsychotics such as clozapine or quetia-pine. Neuroimaging is highly recommended immediatelyfollowing surgery to conﬁrm electrode location and torule out intracranial adverse events.
Points To Be Addressed
The relationship between postoperative confusional
states and patient age, length of surgery, number ofelectrode passes, microrecording, and stimulation shouldbe investigated to determine predictive risk factors and toallow optimal surgical planning.
1.1.2. When Should DBS Programming Be Started?
Available Data
With the initial introduction of DBS surgery, external
electrode interrogation was commonly performed 7 to 10days postoperatively to determine clinical response. Thestimulator was then implanted if efﬁcacy was demon-strated. External stimulation has since been largelyabandoned.
15
Prior to the initiation of stimulation, surgical tracts
may cause microlesioning effects, which may result intransitory symptom improvement. To get an accuraterepresentation of symptoms, the majority of centers pre-fer to delay programming until parkinsonian signs re-turn,
1,16 tissue heals,17and microlesioning effects wear
off.18Practices among centers vary and the duration of
delay and the extent of hospitalization vary. For instance,stimulation assessment 1 to 2 weeks after sur-gery
10,16,19,20 or hospital discharge after 1 week withstimulation initiation 3 to 4 weeks after surgery1,18,21,22
has been reported. Hospitalization during the stimulation
and medication titration period17has also been described.
Hospital discharge 4 to 7 days after surgery has beenreported; prior to discharge, stimulation was initiated atpreset parameters and the patient was provided withguidelines for stimulation titration and medication reduc-tion with access to a nurse specialist and a follow-up visit6 weeks after surgery.
23
Conclusions
Management approaches are variable and do not ap-
pear to affect patient outcome. The decision regardingthe timing of postoperative programming practices isdependent on available resources and convenience atindividual centers.
Pragmatic Recommendations
The time course for the resolution of microlesioning
effects is an important issue for stimulation initiation butis not well established. As a result, the patient should bemade aware of the potential for ﬂuctuations in stimula-tion effects in the ﬁrst several months. Waiting for theresolution of microlesioning effects should be balancedwith the need to relieve patient symptoms.
1.1.3. How to Proceed in Assessing Stimulation
Effects and Optimizing Stimulation Parameters?
Available Data
The assessment of clinical features when optimizing
stimulation parameters is not generally reported in pa-
pers on DBS efﬁcacy. A few papers address the criteriato assess stimulation effects,
17,24,25 which include wrist
rigidity, tremor (if present), bradykinesia, and gait
instability.
Conclusions
There are no formal studies assessing stimulation ef-
fects. Assessment strategies are not uniform, althoughsome items are common to several centers as discussedbelow.
Pragmatic Recommendations
Stimulation effects are generally assessed in two sep-
arate stages. In the ﬁrst stage, a preliminary interrogationusing a monopolar conﬁguration is performed to deter-mine efﬁcacy and side effects of each contact. The con-tact with the greatest efﬁcacy and fewest side effects isselected. Stimulation intensity is slowly increased usingcommonly accepted pulse widths and frequencies. In thesecond stage, a clinical assessment is performed, duringPOSTOPERATIVE ISSUES S221
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006
 15318257, 2006, S14, Downloaded from https://movementdisorders.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mds.20957 by University Of Waterloo Dana Porter Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
which antiparkinsonian medications and stimulation pa-
rameters are adjusted as necessary.
After selection of the optimal contact, symptom re-
duction should be veriﬁed. Rigidity, a sign time-lockedwith stimulation,
17is the most useful acute parameter to
assess given its consistency, reproducibility, and inde-pendence from patient cooperation. A provocation ma-neuver such as elevating the contralateral arm can beperformed should baseline rigidity be insufﬁcient.Tremor, if present, can be used as a secondary targetsymptom. Bradykinesia is less reliable given its potentialinteraction with patient motivation and fatigue. Responseof this feature to stimulation occurs with variable latencyand small changes can be difﬁcult to detect and quantify.
The aims of long-term stimulation are to control
symptoms and to improve features such as on–offphe-
nomena, dyskinesias, and sleep disturbances. Levodopaand subthalamic nucleus (STN) stimulation have similarand additive effects, but the latter has the advantage ofcontinuous and nonﬂuctuating symptom control. The op-timal goal should be the gradual reduction of drug doseswith optimized stimulation.
If satisfactory results are not achieved or signiﬁcant
discrepancies exist between the effects of levodopa andbilateral STN DBS, electrode positioning should bechecked and technical problems should be ruled out.
26
1.1.4. Why Is the Screening Session Important and
How Should It Be Approached?
Available Data and Conclusions
There are no formal studies on the initiation of stim-
ulation. The available data are based on expert opin-ion.
17,24 –26 Stimulation effects are assessed in two stages
as discussed above. The ﬁrst determines the effects andside effects of each contact using a monopolar conﬁgu-ration. One contact is then selected and the stimulationstrength is slowly increased using commonly acceptedpulse widths and frequency parameters.
Pragmatic Recommendations
The ﬁrst priority in programming is to determine the
optimal electrode contact by interrogating each contactfor efﬁcacy and side effects. The optimal contact ideallyhas the widest therapeutic window deﬁned as the ampli-tude interval between the lowest voltage required to elicitclinical effects and the lowest voltage eliciting unwantedside effects. The type of side effect elicited has differingimplications. For instance, the elicitation of dyskinesiapredicts a favorable long-term outcome indicative of awell-placed electrode, whereas other side effects may bedue to the current spread to surrounding structures out-side of the STN. These other side effects include con-
tralateral gaze deviation, hemibody muscle contraction,dysesthesias, dysconjugate ocular deviation, postural in-stability, gait ataxia, sweating, and mydriasis. The selec-tion of the appropriate contact requires differentiatingbetween transitory and persistent side effects.
Hierarchy of the Four Contacts
The determination of which contact to utilize for
chronic stimulation requires a careful bilateral assess-ment of the efﬁcacy of each contact on parkinsoniansymptoms while taking into account the therapeutic win-dow. While a range of symptoms may be assessed, thetarget symptom may differ depending on the nuclei se-lected for stimulation: for example, tremor for ventralintermediate nucleus (Vim); rigidity, tremor, and brady-kinesia for STN; dyskinesias, rigidity, and bradykinesiafor globus pallidus internus (GPi).
17The assessment of
two consecutive contacts requires a sufﬁcient duration ofstimulation discontinuation to allow a return of symp-toms to baseline.
Polarity
Monopolar stimulation is generally selected for cur-
rent delivery; it is considered the most effective optionand the vast majority of patients are successfully pro-grammed with a single contact.
27–29 Bipolar stimulation
may be preferred if a narrower current to reduce theelicitation of side effects is desired.
23Double monopolar
stimulation may be warranted if a single electrode isinsufﬁcient to produce an optimal effect.
17
Amplitude, Pulse Width, and Frequency
During the initial assessment, it is suggested that the
pulse and frequency be held constant while the amplitudeis assessed in increasing increments of 0.5 V from 0 to 6V. A pulse width of 60 milliseconds is usually selected asthe best compromise between clinical beneﬁt and sideeffects.
30A frequency of 130 Hz is generally used during
the initial assessment while a higher frequency (185 Hz)may be used for tremor control in Vim
16,31,32 and in STN
stimulation.26
1.1.5. How Should Stimulation and Medications Be
Titrated for the Three Different Targets?
Available Data
STN stimulation initiation is more complex than that
of GPi or Vim due to the need to balance medicationreduction with increasing stimulation intensity.
14Motor
complications such as dyskinesias and hypokinetic ﬂuc-tuations as well as psychiatric symptoms such as depres-S222 G. DEUSCHL ET AL.
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006
 15318257, 2006, S14, Downloaded from https://movementdisorders.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mds.20957 by University Of Waterloo Dana Porter Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
sion, apathy, and hypomania may develop.17In contrast,
with GPi and Vim stimulation, intensity can be increasedin larger and more rapid increments without alteringmedication. With GPi DBS, antiparkinsonian drugs areeither unchanged,
28,33 slightly increased,34or slightly
decreased.35With Vim DBS, antiparkinsonian drugs are
either unchanged20or slightly reduced in a minority of
patients.31,36 There are no formal studies examining
which type of antiparkinsonian medications may be moreeffective for patients following DBS.
Conclusions
In STN DBS, increasing stimulation parameters are
usually accompanied by a reduction in medication dos-ages. In GPi DBS and Vim DBS, medication dosagesusually do not change signiﬁcantly.
Pragmatic Recommendations
The goal of medication titration is to achieve a balance
between optimizing stimulation effects with concomitantmedication reduction and minimizing side effects fromexcessive reduction of systemic dopaminergic stimula-tion. Levodopa or dopamine agonists can be used, andthere are no established criteria regarding preference.Criteria are the continuous improvement of the mobilityand absence of dyskinesias or other unwanted sideeffects.
1.2. General Aspects of Follow-Up
1.2.1. Should Patients Be Trained to Adjust
Stimulation Parameters?
Available Data
With Vim DBS, patients are usually instructed to
switch OFF the stimulators at night
20,37 to spare battery
life and reduce the possibility of tolerance. This is notrecommended for patients with stimulators in the STN orGPi.
The Access Review Therapy Controller (Medtronic,
Minneapolis, MN) allows patients with a Kinetra im-plantable pulse generator (IPG) (Medtronic) to makeminor adjustments of stimulation parameters (particu-larly of the current amplitude) within the limits set by theprogrammer, whereas the Itrel or Soletra IPGs(Medtronic) do not allow patient adjustment of stimula-tion. Therefore, patient training to adjust stimulators isdevice-dependent and is used by some
38but not all
centers.4,39So far, speciﬁc behavioral problems related to
self-adaptation of stimulation have not been reported.Conclusions
In patients with Kinetra IPGs, the Access Review
Therapy Controller allows for limited patient adjustmentof stimulation parameters, which can enhance symptomcontrol and allow for nocturnal battery sparing.
Pragmatic Recommendations
Patients or caregivers must know how to turn the
stimulator ON and OFF with either a handheld magnet orthe Access Review Therapy Controller. Patients andcaregivers should also be instructed on how to check thestatus of the stimulator with the Access Review TherapyController. If the controller is not available, a transistorradio set to an AM band can be used to determine if thestimulator is ON or OFF.
In patients with Kinetra IPGs, the Access Review
Therapy Controller can allow the patient to switch be-tween preset stimulation parameters. This option can beoffered to highly cooperative patients or caregivers withproven reliability in recognizing clinical features as wellas a clear understanding of stimulation manipulation.
1.2.2. What Are the Criteria for Scheduling Follow-
Up Visits and Telephone Contacts After Surgery?
Available Data
There are no formal criteria for scheduling follow-up
visits or telephone contacts after surgery. In most cen-ters, patients are encouraged to contact the treatmentteam whenever necessary.
37,40 The number of visits tend
to decrease after the ﬁrst postoperative year, when stim-ulation parameters and medication titration has stabi-lized.
38In contrast, some centers do schedule regular
follow-up visits at prespeciﬁed intervals.22,29,39
Conclusions
The frequency of interim visits at each center depends
on patients’ needs and on the available resources (e.g.,physicians, nurses, secretaries, call centers).
Pragmatic Recommendations
Regular follow-up visits are recommended and can be
customized according to individual need. Patients requirefollow-up for as long as they have an implanted device.Device malfunctioning, battery depletion, and ongoingPD management should be monitored. Many centershave scheduled visits at 3 and 6 months and thereafterannually.
Points To Be Addressed
An algorithm for postoperative stimulation manage-
ment and cost– effectiveness analyses are potential topicsfor further investigation.POSTOPERATIVE ISSUES S223
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006
 15318257, 2006, S14, Downloaded from https://movementdisorders.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mds.20957 by University Of Waterloo Dana Porter Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1.2.3. Should OFF Stimulation Assessments Be
Routinely Done and, If So, How Long Should the
Stimulators Be Turned OFF Prior to the
Assessments?
Available Data
There are no formal studies addressing the necessity
for OFF stimulation assessments. There is evidence that75% of all symptoms usually return after 30 minutes ofstopping stimulation. After 3 to 4 hours, deterioration ofmotor symptoms levels off at 90%.
41Switching OFF the
stimulator overnight in patients with STN stimulators isnot well tolerated.
42
Conclusions
Turning OFF the stimulation for 30 minutes for OFF
stimulation assessment is generally sufﬁcient for mostinvestigations.
Pragmatic Recommendations
Motor evaluations in the OFF stimulation condition
are not necessary for routine evaluations. Certain circum-stances (e.g., complaints of side effects such as dystonia,dyskinesias, and postural instability that may be relatedeither to stimulation or to poor symptom control) mayrequire evaluation of the patient OFF stimulation. Asuprathreshold levodopa challenge OFF stimulation pre-dicts the maximal achievable beneﬁt and reveals levo-dopa-resistant motor problems. Motor signs should im-prove to the same degree with both levodopa andstimulation. Reasons for any discrepancies should beexplored (e.g., improper lead location, choice of stimu-lation parameters, and the behavioral state of the patient).Routine evaluations in the OFF stimulation condition canonly be justiﬁed in the context of research protocols.
2. MANAGEMENT OF COMMON
POSTOPERATIVE PROBLEMS AND
OPTIMIZATION IN THE POSTOPERATIVE
PERIOD
2.1. Management of Common Postoperative
Problems
2.1.1. Management of Weight Gain
Available Data
Weight gain has been reported to occur after surgical
therapy for PD. An incidence of 6% to 100% has beenreported for STN DBS
6,29,40,43– 46 and of 26% to 96% for
GPi DBS.47There are no reports on weight gain follow-
ing Vim DBS. The extent of weight gain may be higherin STN DBS
48,49 than in GPi DBS.47The etiology ofweight gain is unclear and has been postulated to be due
to an effect of DBS on hypothalamic centers, changes indopaminergic reduction, and a decrease in energy expen-diture due to amelioration of dyskinesias.
48,49
Conclusions
Weight gain is a common phenomenon following
DBS for PD.
Pragmatic Recommendations
Candidates for a surgical procedure may be given pre-
operative nutritional counseling to prevent excessive weightgain. Uncontrolled long-term observations suggest that theweight of most patients normalizes after 1 or 2 years.
2.1.2. Management of Dyskinesias
Available Data
STN DBS can trigger initial choreiform, ballistic, or
dystonic movements that may resemble levodopa-in-duced dyskinesias.
50,51 The appearance of dyskinesias
assists in the conﬁrmation of appropriate electrode loca-tion in the STN.
52–54 Dyskinesias usually disappear with
chronic STN stimulation50and are markedly improved in
the long term.9,22,29,55,56 Given the similar effect of STN
stimulation and medication, postoperative reduction ofdopaminergic medication is regarded as an importantgoal in many studies.
9,56 –58
GPi DBS has not been reported to induce dyskinesias
and there are no reports of an ampliﬁcation effect ofmedication and stimulation. On the contrary, GPi DBS isbelieved to exert a direct antidyskinetic effect
34,59 with
greater antidyskinetic efﬁcacy suggested in posterior–ventrally located contacts than dorsal contacts.
27Vim
DBS has been reported to have minimal6 0–6 2 or no im-
pact on levodopa-induced dyskinesias.20
Conclusions
STN DBS may aggravate levodopa-induced dyskinesias
in the immediate postoperative period. There are no formalstudies on the adjustment of stimulation parameters anddopaminergic medications to prevent or manage postoper-ative dyskinesias in STN DBS. Management is based onsingle-case reports and expert opinion. GPi DBS exerts adirect antidyskinetic effect, whereas Vim DBS has littleinﬂuence on levodopa-induced dyskinesias in PD.
Pragmatic Recommendations
In the immediate postoperative period following STN
DBS, simpliﬁcation of the medication regimen is advisablegiven the complexity of the interactions between stimula-tion and medications. Monotherapy with immediate releaseS224 G. DEUSCHL ET AL.
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006
 15318257, 2006, S14, Downloaded from https://movementdisorders.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mds.20957 by University Of Waterloo Dana Porter Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
levodopa rather than dopamine agonists or controlled re-
lease formulations can facilitate ease of management. Levo-dopa has a short half-life and is easier to titrate to manageoffphase symptoms and dyskinesias. During the postoper-
ative hospitalization period, the patient is reassessed andoptimal levodopa dosage is decided based on the degree ofParkinsonism and the presence or absence of dyskinesias.The contact that produces dyskinesias is generally the mosteffective contact for the relief of akinetic–rigid symptoms.Since stimulation-induced dyskinesias are worsened bylevodopa, initial programming should be performed beforethe morning medication dose. Low dosages of levodopa canbe resumed if, after a few hours following programming, nodyskinesias appear. The optimal contact is initially set to anamplitude of 0.5 V, a frequency of 130 Hz, and a pulsewidth of 60 milliseconds. The amplitude is increased by 0.2to 0.5 V at 1- to 2-day intervals titrated to adequate symp-tom relief or slight dyskinesias. Initial programming gener-ally lasts 1 to 3 weeks. In the subsequent weeks, a reductionof stimulation effect may occur due to habituation. A slightincrease in the amplitude or an increase in dopaminergictherapy can resolve this change in stimulation effect. Pa-tients with severe preoperative dyskinesias from low levo-dopa dosages may experience severe hyperkinesias withstimulation initiation or small increases in stimulation. Thiscan be avoided with a fairly rapid reduction in medicationat the time of programming. Increasing stimulation bysmaller increments (0.1 V) and waiting for longer intervals(several days) in between each change of amplitude mayfurther allow for induced dyskinesias to subside. As such,several weeks of programming may be necessary for opti-mization. In rare cases, the therapeutic window betweenoptimal symptom control and the dyskinesia threshold issufﬁciently narrow that dyskinesias persist despite slowadjustment. Should this occur, either a more distally orproximally placed contact with a broader therapeutic win-dow or a bipolar stimulation mode should be selected.Following the postoperative optimization of stimulationparameters, levodopa may be replaced with a longer-actingdopamine agonist.
In GPi DBS and Vim DBS, stimulation-induced dys-
kinesias usually do not occur. Therefore, stimulationparameters can be set to the optimal range without theneed for balancing medication and stimulation.
2.1.3. Management of Axial Symptoms
Available Data
Postoperative deterioration of axial symptoms has
been reported as a speciﬁc adverse effect of STN stim-ulation,
4,8,28,31,36,46,63– 67 although the incidence appears
to be low. This includes persistent impairments of pos-tural stability,4a transient decline of balance,28and in-
creased falls.46STN DBS generally results in the post-
operative improvement of axial symptoms compared toboth on and off medication preoperative base-
lines.
3,42,46,68 –71 A less favorable outcome of STN DBS
on axial symptoms compared to the preoperative on
medication baseline was described in one study.72A
greater magnitude of preoperative levodopa response anda lower preoperative severity of axial symptoms havebeen correlated with greater postoperative improvementsof axial symptoms.
73One study suggested that improve-
ment of axial symptoms could be achieved by adjustmentof medication and stimulation due to the observed syn-ergistic effects.
69Long-term deterioration of axial symp-
toms after STN DBS has been reported.22,29,39 However,
rather than a stimulation-related effect, this observeddecline in postural stability, gait, and speech after 2 to 5years has been attributed to the underlying disease pro-gression and effects of nondopaminergic systems andpathways outside the nigrostriatal system.
Impairments in axial symptoms have been reported as
speciﬁc adverse effects of GPi stimulation. These includea transient increase in freezing,
3,35a transient impairment
in balance,28falling,46and persistent gait akinesia.74On
average, most studies report that axial symptoms areimproved following GPi DBS compared to the preoper-ative state.
3,28,35,42,46,74 –76 A long-term deterioration of
axial symptoms including gait initiation failure74and loss
of gait and postural stability77,78 has been reported in
several studies.
In Vim DBS, balance problems have been reported at
3% to 7.5%,31,36,60,63– 67,79 with greater frequency associ-
ated with bilateral stimulation.31,60 The symptoms are
reversible with stimulation parameter changes.60,63
Conclusions
Stimulation-induced deterioration of axial symptoms
has been reported as a speciﬁc side effect following STN,GPi, and Vim DBS. The extent of postoperative axialsymptom improvement may be estimated by the extentof the preoperative levodopa response. Assuming anadequate preoperative levodopa response, optimizationof axial symptoms can be achieved by adjustments ofmedications and stimulation parameters. Observed de-clines of axial symptoms with chronic stimulation arelikely a result of nondopaminergic lesions that cannot bereversed with medications or stimulation.
Pragmatic Recommendations
To manage the side effect of stimulation-induced axial
deterioration, either the active contact or the stimulationparameters should be changed. For STN DBS, a morePOSTOPERATIVE ISSUES S225
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006
 15318257, 2006, S14, Downloaded from https://movementdisorders.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mds.20957 by University Of Waterloo Dana Porter Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
proximally or laterally located contact away from the
prerubral ﬁeld should be selected. If insufﬁcient offpe-
riod symptom improvement prevents a contact change,then a change to a bipolar electrode conﬁguration shouldbe considered. For Vim DBS, a more proximal contact tolimit current spread to the cerebellothalamic ﬁber tractsmay be selected to minimize deterioration of axial symp-toms. If tremor control is insufﬁcient, a bipolar conﬁg-uration should be attempted.
If the postoperative improvement of axial symptoms
is suboptimal despite a favorable preoperative levo-dopa response, each contact should be reassessed forefﬁcacy in the relief of offperiod symptoms. Selection
of a more effective contact may be indicated. If ad-justment of stimulation parameters is not adequate forsymptom control, dopaminergic medication may beslowly increased while carefully assessing for the de-velopment of dyskinesia.
Worsening axial symptoms unresponsive to the above
medication and stimulation manipulations are likely dueto increasing nondopaminergic lesions. Therapeutic ap-proaches are thus limited and supportive care should beprovided.
2.1.4. Management of Speech Dysfunction
Available Data
Hypophonia or dysarthria following initiation of STN
DBS and Vim DBS has been described as a commonproblem. In STN DBS, the prevalence of speech dys-function as a stimulation-induced side effect ranges from4% to 17%.
7,22,29,39,40,55,80 – 82 Dysarthria is the most com-
mon adverse effect of Vim DBS with a prevalence rang-ing from 5% to 25%.
36,60,63– 67,79 Dysarthria is more fre-
quent in bilateral Vim DBS or when DBS is appliedcontralateral to a previous thalamotomy.
60,64 In contrast,
speech difﬁculties following GPi DBS have been infre-quently reported.
3,46,83
The etiology of dysarthria after DBS may be multi-
factorial, but the proximity of the STN and Vim to theinternal capsule and current spread into the internal cap-sule is considered the most important factor.
17,84,85 It has
been shown that STN DBS does not in itself producespeech dysfunction.
86Even in those patients who had
preoperative levodopa-responsive speech disturbancesand had an initial postoperative beneﬁt from STN stim-ulation, worsening of the speech abnormality and resis-tance to treatment over time have been shown in severalstudies.
22,29 This has been attributed to the increase of
dysfunction of nondopaminergic pathways with progres-sion of the disease. In those patients with preoperativelevodopa-resistant speech difﬁculties, STN DBS is noteffective in alleviating the dysfunction.
4,29,69 There is no
study available speciﬁcally focusing on the managementof speech dysfunction following DBS.
Conclusions
Speech dysfunction is a common stimulation-induced
adverse effect of STN DBS and Vim DBS. It rarelyoccurs in GPi DBS. Deterioration of speech function inthe long-term has been reported in several studies as aresult of the progression of the disease.
Pragmatic Recommendations
If speech dysfunction occurs after initiation of STN
DBS or Vim DBS, speech and oral control should beevaluated without medications in the ON and OFF stim-ulation conditions. If speech worsens when stimulation isturned ON, this indicates a stimulation-induced speechdisturbance. These symptoms may be relieved by reduc-ing the amplitude of stimulation or by focusing theelectrical ﬁeld with a bipolar conﬁguration. As there isno habituation to this side effect, some patients accept amild disturbance in speech in exchange for beneﬁt to theother symptoms of PD.
17If there is a relatively low
threshold for the induction of pseudobulbar dysarthriaand a narrow therapeutic window despite optimization, itsuggests that the electrode may be placed too far later-ally, thereby recruiting corticobulbar ﬁbers and reposi-tioning of the electrode should be considered. If thespeech difﬁculty is not affected by altering stimulation, alevodopa challenge with the stimulator turned ON maybe diagnostic. If giving a suprathreshold dose of levo-dopa results in an improvement in the speech deﬁcit, itsuggests that stimulation is suboptimal with an excesspostoperative reduction in medications. In those patientswith preoperative levodopa-resistant speech difﬁcultiesor declining speech function caused by progression ofthe disease, DBS is not effective in alleviating the dys-function.
4,29,69 In those patients, supportive measures
such as the Lee Silverman Voice Treatment87,88 should
be initiated.
2.1.5. Management of Muscle Contractions
Available Data
Tonic muscle contraction has been reported to be a
common phenomenon in patients when increasing thestimulation parameters to suprathreshold values.
24Based
on electrophysiological ﬁndings in patients with STNDBS, it is probably also a result of current spread into theinternal capsule.
84Contractions are often ﬁrst visible in
the contralateral face or hand and may progress to theproximal and lower limb with higher amplitudes.
17TheS226 G. DEUSCHL ET AL.
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006
 15318257, 2006, S14, Downloaded from https://movementdisorders.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mds.20957 by University Of Waterloo Dana Porter Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
prevalence of muscle contractions as a chronic adverse
effect in the different nuclei is low and only single caseshave been reported.
22,39 In one case, revision of the
electrode was necessary and led to resolution.39
Conclusions
Muscle contractions may occur in all targets when
increasing stimulation amplitude to suprathreshold val-ues. Persistence of contractions chronically in DBS pa-tients is infrequent.
Pragmatic Recommendations
As corticospinal ﬁbers form the lateral border of the
STN, diffusion of the current laterally may be diminishedby limiting the amount of tissue inﬂuenced by stimula-tion using strategies such as bipolar conﬁguration andreduction of amplitude. Tetanic muscle contraction doesnot habituate and stimulation parameters should be set atleast 10% below the threshold of visible muscle contrac-tions.
17If the therapeutic window is narrow, it suggests
that the electrode is placed too far laterally and reposi-tioning of the electrode may need to be considered.Diagnostic tests need to be performed to distinguishbetween tonic muscle contraction and dystonia.
2.1.6. Management of Paresthesia
Available Data
In STN DBS, paresthesias contralateral to the stimu-
lation electrode have been reported as a common sideeffect when increasing the stimulation ampli-tude.
6,8,22,39,42,43,55,81 In most cases, paresthesias rapidly
habituate. Paresthesias have been attributed to excitationof medial lemniscal ﬁbers that run posteroventrally to theSTN.
17,85
In Vim DBS, dysesthesias are experienced by the
majority of patients67when the stimulator is switched
ON or the amplitude of stimulation is increased. Theyusually habituate within seconds, but may persist as amild unpleasant and tingling sensation in up to 10% ofthe patients.
63Dysesthesias probably result from current
spread to the adjacent ventrocaudal nucleus of the thal-amus or lemniscal ﬁbers entering the thalamus.
89
In GPi DBS, dysesthesias are not a frequent problem.
There is no literature available to provide evidence for astandard approach to managing dysesthesias.
Conclusions
In STN DBS and Vim DBS, paresthesias are a com-
mon adverse effect and usually habituate.Pragmatic Recommendations
In most cases, paresthesias habituate and resolve
within seconds to minutes. If, however, the paresthesiasare persistent, modiﬁcation of stimulation parameters ora change in electrode conﬁguration may be required. Ifmanipulations of parameters are not successful, reposi-tioning of an electrode may be necessary.
2.1.7. Management of Eyelid and Ocular
Disturbances
Available Data
Eye movement abnormalities include ocular deviation
and eyelid apraxia. Ocular deviation can result in doubleor blurred vision and may cause adduction or upward ordownward eye deviation of the ipsilateral eye as well asconjugate movements of both eyes.
17,90 Ipsilateral ocular
deviation has been attributed to current spread into ocu-lomotor nuclei or nerve ﬁbers and is not a symptom thathabituates.
17,85 In STN DBS, the overall incidence of
severe eye movement disturbances appears to be low. Inone patient, revision of the electrode was regarded nec-essary because of otherwise intractable double vision
80
and in another case surgery was aborted due to visualdisturbances during surgery.
39Ipsilateral eye deviation
has not been reported to occur in GPi DBS or Vim DBS.
Conjugate eye movements are frequently observed
when stimulating at low thresholds within the STN.Conjugate ocular movements have been reported to oc-cur frequently in STN DBS and may be due to inﬂuenceof the oculomotor basal ganglia loop or current diffusionto supranuclear ﬁbers.
17However, the incidence of this
adverse effect is not available in the current literature.There is one case report of contraversive eye deviationduring GPi DBS. This has been attributed to an excita-tion of ﬁbers in the internal capsule.
91
Eyelid opening apraxia has been reported following
STN DBS in several studies with a prevalence between1.8% and 30%.
4,6,22,29,54,55 The incidence of eyelid
apraxia following GPi DBS appears to be signiﬁcantlylower than in STN DBS, and only one case has beenreported.
83It has not been reported following Vim DBS.
The etiology of eyelid opening apraxia has not beenclearly deﬁned. The association, however, with blepha-rospasm suggests a kind of focal dystonia.
92Apraxia of
lid opening may occur early after surgery and improve,or it may persist in the long term.
29Botulinum toxin
injections every 2 to 3 months are an effective method ofcontrolling this symptom,
93,94 further supporting the pos-
sibility of pretarsal blepharospasm. Transient side effectssuch as ptosis, blurred vision, and dry eyes mayoccur.
93,95POSTOPERATIVE ISSUES S227
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006
 15318257, 2006, S14, Downloaded from https://movementdisorders.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mds.20957 by University Of Waterloo Dana Porter Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Conclusions
Eye movement abnormalities following surgery in-
clude monocular ipsilateral eye deviation, conjugate eyemovements, and eyelid opening apraxia.
Pragmatic Recommendations
Monocular eye deviation suggests an electrode that is
placed too far medially. If lowering stimulation param-eters, changing contacts, or switching to bipolar conﬁg-uration is inadequate in terms of optimizing PD controlwithout inducing eye deviation, then the electrode needsto be repositioned. Conjugate eye deviation commonlyhabituates. However, if this is persistent, further adjust-ment of stimulation parameters should be considered.Because apraxia of eyelid opening can occur even withrelatively low stimulation parameters, adjusting stimula-tion does not necessarily resolve the problem. An effec-tive treatment of apraxia of eyelid opening is botulinumtoxin injections in the orbicularis oculi muscle.
2.1.8. Management of Visual Disturbances
Available Data
Visual disturbances in terms of homonymous hemi-
anopias have been described following pallidotomy as aresult of lesioning of the optic tract.
96Optic tract re-
sponses in terms of phosphenes have been utilized tofacilitate intraoperative guidance of the electrode,
97as
the presence of phosphenes suggests excitation of theoptic tract. Permanent visual disturbances have not beendescribed in GPi DBS, STN DBS, or Vim DBS.
Conclusions
In GPi DBS, phosphenes may occur because of current
spread to the adjacent optic tract.
Pragmatic Recommendations
Though phosphenes usually habituate, if persistent, a
more dorsal contact should be chosen for chronicstimulation.
2.1.9. Management of Behavioral and Cognitive
Problems
Available Data
Behavioral and cognitive problems have been reported
with DBS of all three targets. However, the incidence ofthese problems appears to be higher in STN DBS than inGPi DBS or Vim DBS. In STN DBS, the most commonneuropsychiatric side effect in the immediate postopera-tive period is transient confusion with an incidence be-tween 1% and 36%.
7,29,42,44,46,55,81,98 –101 In the follow-upperiod, hypomania, depression, apathy, and suicide risk
have been reported in several studies. Postoperative hy-pomania was reported in 4% to 15% of STN DBSpatients in four studies
29,55,102,103 and postoperative de-
pression has been reported in 1.5% to 25% of pa-tients.
6,29,40,43,46,55,82,98,99,104,105 Overall group depression
scores have been reported to improve at 3 and 12 monthsin multiple studies.
46,102,106,107 However, the clinical rel-
evance has not been ascertained. A number of uncon-trolled series have documented suicide attempts and/orsuicides following STN DBS.
29,108 The base rate of sui-
cide in elderly PD patients has been reported to be eithersimilar to
109or one-tenth the rate of the general popula-
tion.110The base rate of suicide in younger patients with
severe PD who present for surgery is not known but islikely to be higher. Within the ﬁrst three postoperativemonths, apathy, which can respond to dopaminergicmedication, occurs, although the incidence is not known.In contrast, permanent apathy was identiﬁed in 12% ofpatients, in whom 80% had associated decreases onfrontal lobe measures.
29
In STN DBS, the literature regarding neuropsycholog-
ical outcome reports mixed outcomes. In carefully se-lected patients, most groups have reported relatively littlecognitive morbidity,
28,29,107,111–116 with improvements of
unknown clinical relevance in some areas.30,111,117–119 In
contrast, other studies have reported declines. The mostrobust ﬁnding across studies appears to be a decline in wordﬂuency.
102,107,111,112,120 –124 However, a minority of studies
have documented declines in verbal memory102,111,123,125
and selected measures of executive function.123,125
In GPi DBS, case reports suggest that postoperative
neuropsychiatric symptoms can occur.126,127 However,
one study suggested postoperative psychiatric symptomsin GPi DBS are less frequent than after STN DBS as 3 of16 STN versus 0 of 11 GPi patients developed depres-sion requiring psychiatric treatment.
46Overall improve-
ments in group depression and anxiety scores have beendocumented, although the clinical relevance is notknown.
46,112,128 One study that differentiated between
primary and secondary anxiety suggested that GPi stim-ulation improved primary anxiety symptoms.
128
GPi DBS is relatively safe from a neuropsychological
standpoint.76,112,129 Decrements in verbal ﬂuency can oc-
cur,35,125,130,131 but often resolve by 12 months.46In some
cases, a variety of other minor cognitive changes mayoccur after unilateral GPi DBS,
132while in rare instances
of bilateral GPi DBS, signiﬁcant executive dysfunctionmay ensue.
118
In Vim DBS, studies suggest neuropsychological
changes are usually minimal after surgery.133–136 There
are no reports on psychiatric outcomes.S228 G. DEUSCHL ET AL.
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006
 15318257, 2006, S14, Downloaded from https://movementdisorders.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mds.20957 by University Of Waterloo Dana Porter Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Conclusions
In STN DBS, hypomania, depression, and apathy can
occur in the period following initiation of stimulation.Suicidal ideation has been reported. In the long term,depression, apathy, and neuropsychological changeshave been noted.
In GPi DBS, there is an apparently lower incidence of
postoperative psychiatric issues than in STN DBS. How-ever, this may be inﬂuenced by cohort effects, lack ofsystematic observation, or exclusion of high-risk pa-tients. Insufﬁcient studies exist to allow determination ofthe incidence of cognitive deﬁcits after unilateral orbilateral GPi DBS. The procedure is unlikely to result inmajor cognitive morbidity, but verbal ﬂuency and exec-utive function changes can occur.
In Vim DBS, there are insufﬁcient data to draw con-
clusions about the occurrence of postoperative psychiat-ric symptoms. The procedure appears relatively safefrom a cognitive standpoint.
Pragmatic Recommendations
In the initiation/stabilization period, clinicians should
assess for postoperative depression, suicidal ideation,hypomania/mania, and apathy and institute appropriatetreatment as needed. In the long term, patients should beassessed for depression, dementia, apathy, and halluci-nations. Patients should have a complete postoperativeneuropsychological assessment whenever clinically indi-cated. In particular, patients with preoperative vulnera-bilities and apparent cognitive decline or behavioralchanges such as impulse control, poor judgment, patho-logical gambling, or hypersexuality should be monitored.
Points To Be Addressed
The differential role of disease, stimulation, and med-
ications in neurobehavioral symptoms needs to be furtherstudied. This also includes sexual dimensions or speciﬁcfemale/male-related patient problems of patient life andage-related psychosocial problems.
2.2. When Is the Optimal Response to Be Expected,
Do Patients Develop Tolerance, and How Should
Secondary Deterioration Be Improved?
Available Data
STN DBS studies with a follow-up period up to 5
years have been published. In studies with a follow-upperiod of 3 to 6 months,
3,11,42,69,99,137,138 an improvement
inoffand onUniﬁed Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale
(UPDRS) activities of daily living (ADL) and motorsubscores has been reported to be between 44% and 72%and 50% and 70%, respectively. The LED was reducedbetween 37% and 80% and dyskinesias were reduced by
57% to 83% compared to baseline. There were no reportsof reduced efﬁcacy of STN DBS during this short fol-low-up period. Studies covering a period of 12months
4,6,8,14,28,40,44,46,70,80 – 82,100,101,104,105,139,140 showed
an improvement in UPDRS ADL and motor scores be-tween 32% and 78% and 33% and 67%, respectively.LED was reduced by 19% and 69% and dyskinesiasdecreased between 63% and 91%. In some of thesestudies,
4,6,8,28,44,46,82,101,104,139 the evaluations were per-
formed at different time periods. In the ﬁrst year, therewas no deterioration in the beneﬁt achieved with stimu-lation. Analysis of subitems of the UPDRS motor sectionshowed a beneﬁcial response from stimulation on rigid-ity, akinesia/bradykinesia, tremor, and axial symptomsthat was sustained for 12 months following sur-gery.
4,8,46,82 Studies with a follow-up of 24 months
reported a reduction of UPDRS ADL and motorscores between 27% and 55% and 27% and 63%,respectively.
7,9,22,39,45,55 LED was reduced by 32% to
81% and dyskinesias were reduced by 46% to 90%.There was no signiﬁcant deterioration in beneﬁt to motorand ADL subscores or dyskinesias over time. The reduc-tion in LED requirements was sustained for the 24-month period. Subgroup analysis found a deterioration inthe initial beneﬁt to axial symptoms at the time of the lastevaluation.
22One study39also observed a reduction in
the efﬁcacy of STN DBS on postural instability after 24months compared to the 3- and 12-month assessments. Intwo other studies,
9,55improvement of axial symptoms by
stimulation was robust after 2 years. The results of a5-year prospective study of 42 consecutive patients
29
showed an improvement of the UPDRS ADL and motorsubscales by 54% and 49% compared to the preoperativestate. But there was a signiﬁcant worsening of bothUPDRS subscales after 5 years compared to the 1-yearassessment. Worsening of the UPDRS motor scores wasdue to a signiﬁcant decline of the stimulation effect onakinesia/bradykinesia, speech, postural stability, andgait, whereas the improvement of tremor and rigidity wassustained. There was a stable reduction of dyskinesias by52% and LED by 63% after 5 years.
In GPi DBS, there are 11 studies
3,24,28,35,42,46,74,76,139,141,142
that suggest a robust improvement in motor symptomsand dyskinesias after 1 year. However, one study thatcontinued for 2 years
74noted that two out of three
patients had recurrence of motor ﬂuctuations between 9and 15 months, and one-third had gait initiation failurethat was not responsive to alterations in stimulation pa-rameters. Another study that examined the acute effectsof stimulation
141 assessed patients an average of 2.8
years following surgery and found that there was stillPOSTOPERATIVE ISSUES S229
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006
 15318257, 2006, S14, Downloaded from https://movementdisorders.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mds.20957 by University Of Waterloo Dana Porter Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
signiﬁcant improvement in offperiod akinesia/bradyki-
nesia, rigidity, and postural instability, suggesting thatthere is continued beneﬁt from GPi DBS. Conversely,reemergence of symptoms after several months of GPiDBS has also been reported.
78Two of ﬁve patients had
undergone further bilateral STN surgery with an excel-lent result 6 months following the second surgery, andanother two who had loss of efﬁcacy with GPi DBS werein the process of undergoing STN DBS. This outcomeoccurred in another series of 11 patients who had re-ceived bilateral GPi DBS and were followed for up to 5years.
77Though all features of the UPDRS scores except
speech and swallowing were improved at 1 year, at 3years effects on bradykinesia, gait, and postural stabilitywere lost and by 5 years only rigidity was still improvedcompared to baseline. Of four patients at 2 and 3 yearswho lost beneﬁt from GPi DBS, marked improvementrecurred following subsequent placement in the STN.
In Vim DBS, studies with a follow-up period
from 1 month to 8 years report good long-term abolition or signiﬁcant reduction of tremor inPD patients.
16,20,30,31,36,60,61,63,64,67,79,143–147 In most
studies, no evidence of tolerance has been report-ed.
16,20,30,36,60,63,67,79,143–145,147 However, some investi-
gators found some tolerance development ranging from5%
31,146 to 20%61,64 of treated patients. Stimulation pa-
rameters are usually increased during the ﬁrst 6 to 12weeks
36,79 and stable afterward. Only nonsigniﬁcant
changes have been reported in the follow-up period. Inmost studies, Vim DBS has not been reported to improvesymptoms other than tremor.
31,60,63,79 In some studies, a
mild amelioration of rigidity,16,144,146 dyskinesias,61or
akinesia147has been reported.
Conclusions
Patients generally develop an optimal response be-
tween 1 and 6 months following surgery. Only minorimprovements have been reported after this period oftime, though in individual cases a longer adjustment maybe necessary to achieve the best clinical outcome.
In STN DBS, the main effects are substantially pre-
served over a period up to 5 years. The long-term ben-eﬁcial effect of STN DBS includes both offand onmotor
symptoms of PD. Nevertheless, some patients can haveworsening primarily of axial symptoms.
In GPi DBS, tolerance does not develop in the ﬁrst
postoperative year; however, it may occur later. How-ever, the target for DBS within the GPi is less deﬁnedthan for the STN and the present studies are not based ondocumented locations for the electrodes. In Vim DBS,the effect on tremor is sustained in the long term in themajority of patients. Other features such as bradykinesia,rigidity, and dyskinesias show none or only mild im-
provement and may even decline with the natural pro-gression of PD.
Pragmatic Recommendations
Most patients who are properly diagnosed with idio-
pathic PD who have good placement in the target struc-ture and a conﬁrmed response to levodopa should dem-onstrate improvement in parkinsonian symptomatologyduring the initial programming session. Continued ad-justments in medication and stimulation parameters aregenerally necessary over the ﬁrst several months afterimplantation. In general, the vast majority of PD patientsshould be optimized within 6 months following implan-tation. Continued adjustments in medication and stimu-lation will be necessary as the disease progresses.
In STN DBS patients with worsening of axial symp-
toms, an increase in medication or stimulation should beattempted. However, this approach may be unrewardingand supportive care may be the only alternative. Thisincludes assessment of swallowing function with appro-priate interventions such as softening consistency of diet,chin tuck maneuvers, and other measures to ensure pre-vention of aspiration, as well as physical and occupa-tional therapy with a focus on gait training and posturalstability. As postural instability may result in a signiﬁ-cant fall risk, supplemental safety measures such as acane, walker, or wheelchair should be considered. Psy-chological support may also be helpful to patients. Anaggressive and signiﬁcant decline of stimulation effecton all parkinsonian symptoms accompanied by a loss oflevodopa responsiveness may argue for an alternatecause of Parkinsonism. In those cases, further escalationof stimulation or medication is unlikely to yield anybeneﬁt. Instead, supportive care with a focus on theparticular symptom is essential in caring for thesepatients.
In GPi DBS patients, reemerging symptoms should
prompt an adjustment of stimulation parameters, includ-ing a change in electrode conﬁguration, amplitude, fre-quency, and pulse width. Medication adjustment may benecessary with higher doses of dopamine agonists andlevodopa. Supportive care should be provided by a mul-tidisciplinary team. For a cognitively intact patient witha loss of effect from GPi stimulation, surgery with bilat-eral STN DBS may be considered.
In Vim DBS patients, in the case of reoccurrence of
tremor, adjustment in stimulation parameters including achange in electrode conﬁguration, amplitude, frequency,and pulse width should be attempted. However, at somepoint, adverse effects such as dysarthria, dystonia, par-esthesia, and disequilibrium may occur as a result ofS230 G. DEUSCHL ET AL.
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006
 15318257, 2006, S14, Downloaded from https://movementdisorders.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mds.20957 by University Of Waterloo Dana Porter Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
increasing amplitudes that may limit the capacity to
control the tremor. To address the issue of tolerance, oneoption may be to provide a stimulation holiday, possiblyresetting the threshold of the tremor. If a modiﬁcation ofstimulation parameters is ineffective, or if functionaldisability from other symptoms of PD emerges, STNDBS should be considered.
Points To Be Addressed
Prospective studies addressing patients’ characteris-
tics, symptom control, as well as medication regimen areneeded. Prospective studies are needed to determine ifSTN DBS has a modifying inﬂuence on the course of thedisease and speciﬁcally on symptoms resistant to DBS ordopaminergic medication. It is unknown to what extentquality of life is compromised by such resistant symp-toms. Studies should aim at deﬁning predictive factorsfor patients at risk for developing secondary resistantsymptoms.
3. WHAT ARE LONG-TERM
COMPLICATIONS THAT NEED
NEUROSURGICAL ATTENTION?
3.1. Infections and Erosions
Available Data and Conclusions
DBS-related infections present variably in terms of
time and location. Rates of infections vary from 1% to15%
20,22,29,39,42,54,65,67,148 –157 and may occur even months
or years following surgery. They may be related tosystemic infections (sepsis), cellulitis, or skin erosionexposing the implant. No adequate studies are availableconcerning this issue.
Practical Recommendations
Delayed infections and erosions may occur following
DBS surgery. Routine inspection of the skin over theimplant should occur at follow-up visits. Any sign ofinfection such as swelling and erythema or skin erosionshould be referred for immediate attention to theneurosurgeon.
3.2. Sudden Loss of Efﬁcacy or Intermittent
Stimulation Effects
Available Data
Sudden loss of stimulation efﬁcacy following previous
symptom control suggests a hardware-related complica-tion. The risks of these complications varies from 2.7%to 50% of patients.
20,22,29,39,42,54,65,67,148 –157 This wide
range may be related to differences in reporting of du-ration of follow-up, surgical technique, patient selection,the neurosurgeon’s experience, and changes in the hard-
ware available for implantation over time.
The following list summarizes the possible causes of a
sudden failure of stimulation: IPG-related problems,electromagnetic interference, IPG malfunction, IPG endof battery, internal IPG wire breakage, wiring- and lead-related problems, wire or lead fracture, disconnections,and lead dislocation.
Conclusions and Practical Recommendations
There is limited literature regarding how to determine
hardware-related complications, prevention, and optimalmanagement if they occur. The following discussion isbased on expert opinion.
If a sudden loss of stimulation efﬁcacy occurs, the
following steps may be taken to determine the etiology.
One, the IPG status should be assessed. The most
frequent cause of a sudden decrease in stimulation efﬁ-cacy is an accidental turning OFF of one or both neuro-stimulators. Unless the patient used a magnet or thepatient Access Review Therapy Controller to turn OFFthe neurostimulator, electromagnetic interference (EMI)is likely the cause. Unusually high numbers of ON–OFFcycles, in a range of /H1102225 events in the neurostimulator
log, are further evidence of this. Resetting the magnetactivation counter to zero at the end of each follow-upvisit permits frequent inadvertent activation cycles to becorrelated with speciﬁc time intervals. Household de-vices used in close proximity to the IPG may cause EMI.Examples are electric shavers, electric toothbrushes, mi-crowaves, and mixers, as well as electric drills and otherpower tools. EMI has occasionally been reported due toantitheft devices in department stores or security gateswith metal detectors. A detailed patient history, includ-ing the time an increase in PD symptoms was ﬁrst noted,usually helps to narrow down the source of EMI. Patienttraining and education is required to avoid this. If pa-tients with Kinetra neurostimulators experience prob-lems related to EMI, the neurostimulator’s magneticswitch may be disabled.
Two, if the programming device does not connect
telemetrically with the IPG, it suggests battery exhaus-tion. When the battery is close to running out, then theAccess Review Therapy Controller indicates “end oflife” (EOL). If parameter settings are back to default(factory settings) wit h 0 V output device switched OFF
and serial number unavailable, the program controllerindicates “power on reset” (POR). This has been found tobe associated with hardware failure
158and referral to the
neurosurgeon is indicated for possible IPG replacement.
Three, if after interrogation, it is found that the IPG is
ON with appropriate settings, a connection problem mayPOSTOPERATIVE ISSUES S231
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006
 15318257, 2006, S14, Downloaded from https://movementdisorders.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mds.20957 by University Of Waterloo Dana Porter Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
be suspected. The integrity of the electrical circuit can be
assessed through the measurement of impedance andbattery load. Impedances greater than 2,000 Ohm (Sole-tra or Itrel II) or 4,000 Ohm (Kinetra) suggest a connec-tion problem. If the open-circuit current of the neuro-stimulator battery (Itrel II neurostimulator 7 /H9262A and
Kinetra neurostimulator 15 /H9262A) does not increase while
carefully raising the amplitude to a maximum of 3 to 5 V,an interrupted electrical circuit is very likely. Imped-ances below 50 Ohm and high battery drain /H110222,000/H9262A
indicate a short circuit in the system. Plane radiographsmay show disconnection or a fracture in the DBS elec-trode or extension wires.
156In rare occasions, connection
problems are not evident on X-ray and may requiresurgical externalization of the system. Regardless, refer-ral to the neurosurgeon should be made for further eval-uation and treatment.
Four, if a connection problem has been ruled out, lead
migration should be considered. An imaging study is man-datory. Signiﬁcant migration may be visible on skull X-rays, though minor displacements may require CT or MRI.It is important to note that with MRI there is a theoreticalrisk of injury from electric current induced by the magneticﬁeld.
159Referral to the neurosurgeon is indicated for further
evaluation, including the comparison of the new imagingstudy with the postoperative scans.
3.3. Pain and Discomfort Following Implantation
Available Data
Neck pain or restrictions of head movements may
occur in relation to the extension wires, although this hasnot been speciﬁcally reported in the literature.
Practical Recommendations
Complaints of neck discomfort or pain during head
movements should be referred to the neurosurgeon forfurther evaluation of treatment options.
Points To Be Addressed
Device-related complications and infections can lead
to signiﬁcant morbidity and have an important economicimpact. There is a clear necessity for prospective con-trolled trials to assess the incidence of these complica-tions and techniques to prevent them.
4. LONG-TERM PROBLEMS
4.1. Are There Speciﬁc Postoperative Social or Job-
Related Problems?
Available Data
There are two studies on short-term social outcomes in
patients with STN DBS.
98,160 There are no studies onlong-term social outcomes or on job-related problems. In
a retrospective short-term study utilizing the Social Ad-justment Scale, late age of PD onset was associated withpoor global social adjustment. Poor adjustments in sociallife, leisure, and social adaptation were associated withthe persistence of levodopa-induced motor symptoms.Despite motor improvements, 6 (25%) of 24 patients hada deterioration in marital relations, explained as relatedto changes in autonomy and roles.
98A qualitative study
at 6 months following surgery documented descriptivepsychological and relationship difﬁculties.
160Other stud-
ies have also reported in passing behavioral changessufﬁciently noticeable to involve disturbance of familyor social interactions.
123
Conclusions
There are insufﬁcient data to comment on social out-
comes adequately.
Pragmatic Recommendations
Clinicians should be aware of the potential for impair-
ments in social outcomes following the procedure. Thisshould be addressed during preoperative counseling andpostoperative assessments. The extent of baseline socialimpairment in this group with advanced PD presentingfor surgery may be a contributory factor. Social rehabil-itation programs, individual/couple counseling, or sup-port groups may be useful for some patients.
Points To Be Addressed
As social outcomes are of signiﬁcant clinical rele-
vance to patients, studies focusing on such outcomes inthe long-term should be performed. Prospective con-trolled studies to determine prognostic or contributoryfactors for social outcome would be indicated. Similar toepilepsy surgery, where social rehabilitation programsare part of the multidisciplinary treatment plan, DBSsurgery is also a major life event and, although insufﬁ-cient data exist, rehabilitation programs are consideredimportant for the future development of DBS therapy.
4.2. Long-Term Development of Dementia
Available Data
Dementia is a late and likely an age-dependent com-
plication of PD in approximately 30% of patients. Thediagnosis frequently coexists with or is preceded bymedication-induced psychiatric side effects.
161 The
pathophysiology may be associated with the neurodegen-erative process of PD affecting cortical regions and non-dopaminergic brainstem or basal frontal nuclei.
162De-S232 G. DEUSCHL ET AL.
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006
 15318257, 2006, S14, Downloaded from https://movementdisorders.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mds.20957 by University Of Waterloo Dana Porter Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
mentia is not improved by dopaminergic medications
and DBS does not reverse cognitive decline.
In a 5-year prospective study of 49 patients, 6% of
patients developed dementia, though notably there wasno comparative control group.
29Similar to that observed
in the general PD population, the appearance of behav-ioral symptoms such as apathy and hallucinations ap-pears to parallel this decline in the postoperativepopulation.
29
There are no reports of treatment for dementia in PD
patients with DBS. Recently, a large randomized study onthe effect of rivastigmine in PD dementia found a positiveeffect on cognitive function and overall status.
163
Conclusions
Dementia occurs in PD patients with DBS, but the
incidence seems to be similar to that of the general PDpopulation. There are no speciﬁc studies on the treatmentof patients with dementia with DBS.
Pragmatic Recommendations
Although insufﬁcient data exist, as with clinical man-
agement of general PD patients, clinicians should beaware of the potential development of dementia in thePD DBS population. The underlying etiology is believedto represent the natural course of the disease process,
30
although further controlled studies are required to con-ﬁrm this. Cognitive status should be screened duringpostoperative follow-up visits and appropriate therapyshould be considered. A multidisciplinary approachshould be utilized in the management of dementia. Sig-niﬁcant cognitive deﬁcits following intraoperative com-plications have a different underlying etiology and maynot respond to standard dementia therapy such as cho-linesterase inhibitors.
Points To Be Addressed
Controlled studies should address the frequency, pre-
dictive factors, and treatment of dementia in the DBSpopulation. The limitations of DBS on nonmotor aspectsof PD progression should be recognized and activelyaddressed.
4.3. General Medical Issues
Available Data
There are no formal studies on the interference of
medical procedures with DBS. Pulse-modulated radio-frequency diathermy applied to the maxilla producedpermanent diencephalic and brainstem lesions leading toa vegetative state in one STN DBS patient.
164The elec-
trical current induced by the magnetic ﬁeld of MRIscanners carries a theoretical risk of injury.159We are
aware of one case of a permanent brainstem lesion afterspinal cord MRI (Ali Rezai, personal communication).Case reports indicate that cardiac pacemakers and a DBSsystem may be safely implanted in the same patient.Cardiac deﬁbrillation carries a theoretical risk of injury;however, no neurological sequelae were reported in apatient following 10 cardioversions from an internal car-diac deﬁbrillator.
165Although not formally reported in
the literature, EMI may result from a variety of medicaldevices (e.g., X-ray or vibrators used in physical therapy).Electrocoagulation during surgery may carry a theoreticalrisk by inducing currents within the DBS system, but thusfar no adverse effects have been reported.
There are no formal studies on the interference of DBS
with medical diagnostic procedures. DBS may causeartifacts in electrodiagnostic procedures such as ECG,EEG, and evoked potentials, which are not harmful to thepatient unless they are misinterpreted as representingpathological abnormalities, particularly by automatedcomputerized reading programs.
Conclusions
Diathermy can interfere with DBS and can cause life-
threatening complications. There are no conclusive dataon the safety of head coil MRI, cardiac deﬁbrillation, orelectrocoagulation. DBS may interfere with electrodiag-nostic procedures but is not harmful to the patient.
Pragmatic Recommendations
Diathermy must be avoided in DBS patients. The use
of MRI should be restricted to protocols that have beenevaluated for safety. Safe protocols exist for MRI of thehead but not for the spinal cord and trunk. Recommen-dations from the manufacturer, which may serve as aguideline, are provided in the Soletra and Kinetra pack-aging instructions. Cardiac devices can be implanted butthe patient should be carefully followed for potentialinteractions between the two devices. Electrocoagulationduring surgery should be restricted to a bipolar mode assuggested by the manufacturer. If artifacts on electrodi-agnostic tests are a concern, the IPG can be switchedOFF during testing.
4.4. Lifestyle Issues
Available Data and Conclusions
There is no literature regarding restrictions of DBS
patients in professional or leisure activities.
Pragmatic Recommendations
Security gates with metal detectors may turn OFF the
DBS device and should be avoided by DBS patients.POSTOPERATIVE ISSUES S233
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006
 15318257, 2006, S14, Downloaded from https://movementdisorders.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mds.20957 by University Of Waterloo Dana Porter Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Some professional or leisure activities may require the use
of machinery that may result in EMI; solutions should besought on an individual basis. Common sense suggests thatany sport causing extreme mechanical stress to the deviceshould be avoided (e.g., contact sports such as headersduring soccer, parachuting). Legal regulations in somecountries may forbid patients with DBS to operate machin-ery such as airplanes. DBS does not speciﬁcally limit driv-ing a car, but, as with any general PD patient, this should beassessed on an individual basis.
REFERENCES
1. Byrd DL, Marks WJ Jr, Starr PA. Deep brain stimulation for
advanced Parkinson’s disease. AORN J 2000;72:387– 408.
2. Hariz MI, Johansson F, Shamsgovara P, Johansson E, Hariz GM,
Fagerlund M. Bilateral subthalamic nucleus stimulation in a par-kinsonian patient with preoperative deﬁcits in speech and cogni-tion: persistent improvement in mobility but increased depen-dency: a case study. Mov Disord 2000;15:136 –139.
3. Krack P, Pollak P, Limousin P, et al. Subthalamic nucleus or
internal pallidal stimulation in young onset Parkinson’s disease.Brain 1998;121(Pt. 3):451– 457.
4. Limousin P, Krack P, Pollak P, et al. Electrical stimulation of the
subthalamic nucleus in advanced Parkinson’s disease. N EnglJ Med 1998;339:1105–1111.
5. Benabid AL, Koudsie A, Benazzouz A, et al. Deep brain stimu-
lation for Parkinson’s disease. Adv Neurol 2001;86:405– 412.
6. Romito LM, Scerrati M, Contarino MF, Bentivoglio AR, Tonali P,
Albanese A. Long-term follow up of subthalamic nucleus stimula-tion in Parkinson’s disease. Neurology 2002;58:1546 –1550.
7. Tavella A, Bergamasco B, Bosticco E, et al. Deep brain stimu-
lation of the subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson’s disease: long-term follow-up. Neurol Sci 2002;23(Suppl. 2):S111–S112.
8. Simuni T, Jaggi JL, Mulholland H, et al. Bilateral stimulation of
the subthalamic nucleus in patients with Parkinson disease: astudy of efﬁcacy and safety. J Neurosurg 2002;96:666 – 672.
9. Vingerhoets FJ, Villemure JG, Temperli P, Pollo C, Pralong E,
Ghika J. Subthalamic DBS replaces levodopa in Parkinson’sdisease: two-year follow-up. Neurology 2002;58:396 – 401.
10. Durif F, Lemaire JJ, Debilly B, Dordain G. Acute and chronic
effects of anteromedial globus pallidus stimulation in Parkinson’sdisease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1999;67:315–322.
11. Houeto JL, Damier P, Bejjani PB, et al. Subthalamic stimulation
in Parkinson disease: a multidisciplinary approach. Arch Neurol2000;57:461– 465.
12. Santens P, De Letter M, Van Borsel J, De Reuck J, Caemaert J.
Lateralized effects of subthalamic nucleus stimulation on differ-ent aspects of speech in Parkinson’s disease. Brain Lang 2003;87:253–258.
13. Counelis GJ, Simuni T, Forman MS, Jaggi JL, Trojanowski JQ,
Baltuch GH. Bilateral subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulationfor advanced PD: correlation of intraoperative MER and postop-erative MRI with neuropathological ﬁndings. Mov Disord 2003;18:1062–1065.
14. Thobois S, Corvaisier S, Mertens P, et al. The timing of antipar-
kinsonian treatment reduction after subthalamic nucleus stimula-tion. Eur Neurol 2003;49:59 – 63.
15. Hamel W, Fietzek U, Morsnowski A, et al. Deep brain stimula-
tion of the subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson’s disease: evaluationof active electrode contacts. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2003;74:1036 –1046.
16. Benabid AL, Pollak P, Gervason C, et al. Long-term suppression
of tremor by chronic stimulation of the ventral intermediatethalamic nucleus. Lancet 1991;337:403– 406.17. Krack P, Fraix V, Mendes A, Benabid AL, Pollak P. Postopera-
tive management of subthalamic nucleus stimulation for Parkin-son’s disease. Mov Disord 2002;17(Suppl. 3):S188 –S197.
18. Eriksen SK, Tuite PJ, Maxwell RE, Sullivan M, Low WC, Ebner
TJ. Bilateral subthalamic nucleus stimulation for the treatment ofParkinson’s disease: results of six patients. J Neurosci Nursing2003;35:223–231.
19. Doshi PK, Chhaya NA, Bhatt MA. Bilateral subthalamic nucleus
stimulation for Parkinson’s disease. Neurol Ind 2003;51:43– 48.
20. Koller W, Pahwa R, Busenbark K, et al. High-frequency unilat-
eral thalamic stimulation in the treatment of essential and parkin-sonian tremor. Ann Neurol 1997;42:292–299.
21. Hariz GM, Bergenheim AT, Hariz MI, Lindberg M. Assessment
of ability/disability in patients treated with chronic thalamic stim-ulation for tremor. Mov Disord 1998;13:78 – 83.
22. Kleiner-Fisman G, Fisman DN, Sime E, Saint-Cyr JA, Lozano
AM, Lang AE. Long-term follow up of bilateral deep brainstimulation of the subthalamic nucleus in patients with advancedParkinson disease. J Neurosurg 2003;99:489 – 495.
23. Patel NK, Plaha P, O’Sullivan K, McCarter R, Heywood P, Gill
SS. MRI directed bilateral stimulation of the subthalamic nucleusin patients with Parkinson’s disease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychi-atry 2003;74:1631–1637.
24. Kumar R. Methods for programming and patient management
with deep brain stimulation of the globus pallidus for the treat-ment of advanced Parkinson’s disease and dystonia. Mov Disord2002;17(Suppl. 3):S198 –S207.
25. Dowsey-Limousin P. Postoperative management of Vim DBS for
tremor. Mov Disord 2002;17(Suppl. 3):S208 –S211.
26. Volkmann J, Herzog J, Kopper F, Deuschl G. Introduction to the
programming of deep brain stimulators. Mov Disord 2002;17(Suppl. 3):S181–S187.
27. Bejjani B, Damier P, Arnulf I, et al. Pallidal stimulation for Parkin-
son’s disease: two targets? Neurology 1997;49:1564 –1569.
28. Burchiel KJ, Anderson VC, Favre J, Hammerstad JP. Comparison
of pallidal and subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation foradvanced Parkinson’s disease: results of a randomized, blindedpilot study. Neurosurgery 1999;45:1375–1382.
29. Krack P, Batir A, Van Blercom N, et al. Five-year follow-up of
bilateral stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus in advanced Par-kinson’s disease. N Engl J Med 2003;349:1925–1934.
30. Benabid AL, Pollak P, Seigneuret E, Hoffmann D, Gay E, Perret
J. Chronic Vim thalamic stimulation in Parkinson’s disease, es-sential tremor and extra-pyramidal dyskinesias. Acta Neurochir1993;58(Suppl.):39 – 44.
31. Benabid AL, Pollak P, Gao D, et al. Chronic electrical stimulation
of the ventralis intermedius nucleus of the thalamus as a treatmentof movement disorders. J Neurosurg 1996;84:203–214.
32. Duff J, Sime E. Surgical interventions in the treatment of Parkin-
son’s disease (PD) and essential tremor (ET): medial pallidotomyin PD and chronic deep brain stimulation (DBS) in PD and ET.Axon 1997;18:85– 89.
33. Galvez-Jimenez N, Lozano A, Tasker R, Duff J, Hutchison W, Lang
AE. Pallidal stimulation in Parkinson’s disease patients with a priorunilateral pallidotomy. Can J Neurol Sci 1998;25:300 –305.
34. Krack P, Pollak P, Limousin P, et al. Opposite motor effects of
pallidal stimulation in Parkinson’s disease. Ann Neurol 1998;43:180 –192.
35. Volkmann J, Sturm V, Weiss P, et al. Bilateral high-frequency
stimulation of the internal globus pallidus in advanced Parkin-son’s disease. Ann Neurol 1998;44:953–961.
36. Albanese A, Nordera GP, Caraceni T, Moro E. Long-term vent-
ralis intermedius thalamic stimulation for parkinsonian tremor:Italian Registry for Neuromodulation in Movement Disorders.Adv Neurol 1999;80:631– 634.
37. Hubble JP, Busenbark KL, Wilkinson S, et al. Effects of thalamic
deep brain stimulation based on tremor type and diagnosis. MovDisord 1997;12:337–341.S234 G. DEUSCHL ET AL.
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006
 15318257, 2006, S14, Downloaded from https://movementdisorders.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mds.20957 by University Of Waterloo Dana Porter Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
38. Panikar D, Kishore A. Deep brain stimulation for Parkinson’s
disease. Neurol Ind 2003;51:167–175.
39. Pahwa R, Wilkinson SB, Overman J, Lyons KE. Bilateral sub-
thalamic stimulation in patients with Parkinson disease: long-term follow up. J Neurosurg 2003;99:71–77.
40. Valldeoriola F, Pilleri M, Tolosa E, Molinuevo JL, Rumia J,
Ferrer E. Bilateral subthalamic stimulation monotherapy in ad-vanced Parkinson’s disease: long-term follow-up of patients. MovDisord 2002;17:125–132.
41. Temperli P, Ghika J, Villemure JG, Burkhard PR, Bogousslavsky
J, Vingerhoets FJ. How do parkinsonian signs return after dis-continuation of subthalamic DBS? Neurology 2003;60:78 – 81.
42. Deep-Brain Stimulation for Parkinson’s Disease Study G. Deep-
brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus or the pars interna ofthe globus pallidus in Parkinson’s disease. N Engl J Med 2001;345:956 –963.
43. Martinez-Martin P, Valldeoriola F, Tolosa E, et al. Bilateral
subthalamic nucleus stimulation and quality of life in advancedParkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2002;17:372–377.
44. Tamma F, Rampini P, Egidi M, et al. Deep brain stimulation for
Parkinson’s disease: the experience of the Policlinico–San PaoloGroup in Milan. Neurol Sci 2003;24(Suppl. 1):S41–S42.
45. Figueiras-Mendez R, Regidor I, Riva-Meana C, Magarinos-Ascone
CM. Further supporting evidence of beneﬁcial subthalamic stimula-tion in Parkinson’s patients. Neurology 2002;58:469 – 470.
46. Volkmann J, Allert N, Voges J, Weiss PH, Freund HJ, Sturm V.
Safety and efﬁcacy of pallidal or subthalamic nucleus stimulationin advanced PD. Neurology 2001;56:548 –551.
47. Gironell A, Pascual-Sedano B, Otermin P, Kulisevsky J. Weight
gain after functional surgery for Parkinsons disease. Neurologia2002;17:310 –316.
48. Macia F, Perlemoine C, Coman I, et al. Parkinson’s disease
patients with bilateral subthalamic deep brain stimulation gainweight. Mov Disord 2004;19:206 –212.
49. Barichella M, Marczewska AM, Mariani C, Landi A, Vairo A,
Pezzoli G. Body weight gain rate in patients with Parkinson’s diseaseand deep brain stimulation. Mov Disord 2003;18:1337–1340.
50. Krack P, Pollak P, Limousin P, Benazzouz A, Deuschl G, Bena-
bid A. From off-period dystonia to peak-dose chorea: the clinicalspectrum of varying subthalamic nucleus activity. Brain 1999;122(Pt. 6):1133–1146.
51. Limousin P, Pollak P, Hoffmann D, Benazzouz A, Perret JE,
Benabid AL. Abnormal involuntary movements induced by sub-thalamic nucleus stimulation in parkinsonian patients. Mov Dis-ord 1996;11:231–235.
52. Benabid AL, Benazzouz A, Limousin P, et al. Dyskinesias and the
subthalamic nucleus. Ann Neurol 2000;47(Suppl. 1):S189 –S192.
53. Houeto JL, Welter ML, Bejjani PB, et al. Subthalamic stimulation
in Parkinson disease: intraoperative predictive factors. Arch Neu-rol 2003;60:690 – 694.
54. Umemura A, Jaggi JL, Hurtig HI, et al. Deep brain stimulation for
movement disorders: morbidity and mortality in 109 patients.J Neurosurg 2003;98:779 –784.
55. Herzog J, Volkmann J, Krack P, et al. Two-year follow-up of
subthalamic deep brain stimulation in Parkinson’s disease. MovDisord 2003;18:1332–1337.
56. Moro E, Esselink RJ, Benabid AL, Pollak P. Response to levo-
dopa in parkinsonian patients with bilateral subthalamic nucleusstimulation. Brain 2002;125(Pt. 11):2408 –2417.
57. Kleiner-Fisman G, Saint-Cyr J, Miyasaki J, Lozano A, Lang A.
Subthalamic DBS replaces levodopa in Parkinson’s disease. Neu-rology 2002;59:1293–1294.
58. Lang A, Kleiner-Fisman G, Saint-Cyr J, Miyasaki J, Lozano A.
Subthalamic DBS replaces levodopa in Parkinson’s disease: two-year follow-up. Neurology 2003;60:154 –155.
59. Vitek J. Deep brain stimulation for Parkinson’s disease: a critical
re-evaluation of STN versus GPi DBS. Stereotact Funct Neuro-surg 2002;78:119 –131.60. Limousin P, Speelman JD, Gielen F, Janssens M. Multicentre
European study of thalamic stimulation in parkinsonian and es-sential tremor. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1999;66:289 –296.
61. Caparros-Lefebvre D, Blond S, Vermersch P, Pecheux N, Guieu
JD, Petit H. Chronic thalamic stimulation improves tremor andlevodopa induced dyskinesias in Parkinson’s disease. J NeurolNeurosurg Psychiatry 1993;56:268 –273.
62. Caparros-Lefebvre D, Blond S, Feltin MP, Pollak P, Benabid AL.
Improvement of levodopa induced dyskinesias by thalamic deepbrain stimulation is related to slight variation in electrode place-ment: possible involvement of the centre median and parafascicu-laris complex. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1999;67:308 –314.
63. Alesch F, Pinter MM, Helscher RJ, Fertl L, Benabid AL, Koos
WT. Stimulation of the ventral intermediate thalamic nucleus intremor dominated Parkinson’s disease and essential tremor. ActaNeurochir 1995;136:75– 81.
64. Hariz MI, Shamsgovara P, Johansson F, Hariz G, Fodstad H.
Tolerance and tremor rebound following long-term chronic tha-lamic stimulation for Parkinsonian and essential tremor. Ster-eotact Funct Neurosurg 1999;72:208 –218.
65. Lyons KE, Koller WC, Wilkinson SB, Pahwa R. Long term safety
and efﬁcacy of unilateral deep brain stimulation of the thalamusfor parkinsonian tremor. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2001;71:682– 684.
66. Obwegeser AA, Uitti RJ, Witte RJ, Lucas JA, Turk MF, Wharen
RE Jr. Quantitative and qualitative outcome measures after tha-lamic deep brain stimulation to treat disabling tremors. Neuro-surgery 2001;48:274 –281.
67. Schuurman PR, Bosch DA, Bossuyt PM, et al. A comparison of
continuous thalamic stimulation and thalamotomy for suppres-sion of severe tremor. N Engl J Med 2000;342:461– 468.
68. Rizzone M, Lanotte M, Bergamasco B, et al. Deep brain stimu-
lation of the subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson’s disease: effectsof variation in stimulation parameters. J Neurol Neurosurg Psy-chiatry 2001;71:215–219.
69. Bejjani BP, Gervais D, Arnulf I, et al. Axial parkinsonian symptoms
can be improved: the role of levodopa and bilateral subthalamicstimulation. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2000;68:595– 600.
70. Kumar R, Lozano AM, Kim YJ, et al. Double-blind evaluation of
subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation in advanced Parkin-son’s disease. Neurology 1998;51:850 – 855.
71. Krack P, Benazzouz A, Pollak P, et al. Treatment of tremor in
Parkinson’s disease by subthalamic nucleus stimulation. MovDisord 1998;13:907–914.
72. Allert N, Volkmann J, Dotse S, Hefter H, Sturm V, Freund HJ.
Effects of bilateral pallidal or subthalamic stimulation on gait inadvanced Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2001;16:1076 –1085.
73. Welter ML, Houeto JL, Tezenas du Montcel S, et al. Clinical
predictive factors of subthalamic stimulation in Parkinson’s dis-ease. Brain 2002;125(Pt. 3):575–583.
74. Ghika J, Villemure JG, Fankhauser H, Favre J, Assal G, Ghika-
Schmid F. Efﬁciency and safety of bilateral contemporaneouspallidal stimulation (deep brain stimulation) in levodopa-respon-sive patients with Parkinson’s disease with severe motor ﬂuctu-ations: a 2-year follow-up review. J Neurosurg 1998;89:713–718.
75. Defebvre LJ, Krystkowiak P, Blatt JL, et al. Inﬂuence of pallidal
stimulation and levodopa on gait and preparatory postural adjust-ments in Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2002;17:76 – 83.
76. Loher TJ, Burgunder JM, Pohle T, Weber S, Sommerhalder R,
Krauss JK. Long-term pallidal deep brain stimulation in patientswith advanced Parkinson disease: 1-year follow-up study. J Neu-rosurg 2002;96:844 – 853.
77. Volkmann J, Allert N, Voges J, Sturm V, Schnitzler A, Freund
HJ. Long-term results of bilateral pallidal stimulation in Parkin-son’s disease. Ann Neurol 2004;55:871– 875.
78. Houeto JL, Bejjani PB, Damier P, et al. Failure of long-term
pallidal stimulation corrected by subthalamic stimulation in PD.Neurology 2000;55:728 –730.POSTOPERATIVE ISSUES S235
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006
 15318257, 2006, S14, Downloaded from https://movementdisorders.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mds.20957 by University Of Waterloo Dana Porter Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
79. Kumar K, Kelly M, Toth C. Deep brain stimulation of the ventral
intermediate nucleus of the thalamus for control of tremors inParkinson’s disease and essential tremor. Stereotact Funct Neu-rosurg 1999;72:47– 61.
80. Broggi G, Franzini A, Ferroli P, et al. Effect of bilateral subtha-
lamic electrical stimulation in Parkinson’s disease. Surg Neurol2001;56:89 –94.
81. Iansek R, Rosenfeld JV, Huxham FE. Deep brain stimulation of
the subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson’s disease. Med J Aust2002;177:142–146.
82. Ostergaard K, Sunde N, Dupont E. Effects of bilateral stimulation
of the subthalamic nucleus in patients with severe Parkinson’sdisease and motor ﬂuctuations. Mov Disord 2002;17:693–700.
83. Kumar R, Lang AE, Rodriguez-Oroz MC, et al. Deep brain
stimulation of the globus pallidus pars interna in advanced Par-kinson’s disease. Neurology 2000;55(Suppl. 6):S34 –S39.
84. Ashby P, Kim YJ, Kumar R, Lang AE, Lozano AM. Neurophys-
iological effects of stimulation through electrodes in the humansubthalamic nucleus. Brain 1999;122(Pt. 10):1919 –1931.
85. Tamma F, Caputo E, Chiesa V, et al. Anatomo– clinical correlation
of intraoperative stimulation-induced side-effects during HF-DBS ofthe subthalamic nucleus. Neurol Sci 2002;23(Suppl. 2):S109 –S110.
86. Gentil M, Garcia-Ruiz P, Pollak P, Benabid AL. Effect of bilat-
eral deep-brain stimulation on oral control of patients with par-kinsonism. Eur Neurol 2000;44:147–152.
87. Ramig LO, Sapir S, Countryman S, et al. Intensive voice treat-
ment (LSVT) for patients with Parkinson’s disease : a 2 year
follow up. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2001;71:493– 498.
88. Sapir S, Ramig LO, Hoyt P, Countryman S, O’Brien C, Hoehn M.
Speech loudness and quality 12 months after intensive voice treat-ment (LSVT) for Parkinson’s disease: a comparison with an alter-native speech treatment. Folia Phoniatr Logop 2002;54:296 –303.
89. Kiss ZH, Anderson T, Hansen T, Kirstein D, Suchowersky O, Hu
B. Neural substrates of microstimulation-evoked tingling: achronaxie study in human somatosensory thalamus. Eur J Neu-rosci 2003;18:728 –732.
90. Spiegel EA, Wycis HT, Szekely EG, et al. Stimulation of Forel’s
ﬁeld during stereotaxic operations in the human brain. Electro-encephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1964;16:537–548.
91. Anagnostou E, Sporer B, Steude U, Kempermann U, Buttner U,
Botzel K. Contraversive eye deviation during deep brain stimulationof the globus pallidus internus. Neurology 2001;56:1396 –1399.
92. Tozlovanu V, Forget R, Iancu A, Boghen D. Prolonged orbicu-
laris oculi activity: a major factor in apraxia of lid opening.Neurology 2001;57:1013–1018.
93. Forget R, Tozlovanu V, Iancu A, Boghen D. Botulinum toxin
improves lid opening delays in blepharospasm-associated apraxiaof lid opening. Neurology 2002;58:1843–1846.
94. Boghen D, Tozlovanu V, Iancu A, Forget R. Botulinum toxin
therapy for apraxia of lid opening. Ann NY Acad Sci 2002;956:482– 483.
95. Krack P, Marion MH. “Apraxia of lid opening,” a focal eyelid
dystonia: clinical study of 32 patients. Mov Disord 1994;9:610 – 615.
96. Biousse V, Newman NJ, Carroll C, et al. Visual ﬁelds in patients
with posterior GPi pallidotomy. Neurology 1998;50:258 –265.
97. Kirschman DL, Milligan B, Wilkinson S, et al. Pallidotomy
microelectrode targeting: neurophysiology-based target reﬁne-ment. Neurosurgery 2000;46:613– 622.
98. Houeto JL, Mesnage V, Mallet L, et al. Behavioural disorders,
Parkinson’s disease and subthalamic stimulation. J Neurol Neu-rosurg Psychiatry 2002;72:701–707.
99. Molinuevo JL, Valldeoriola F, Tolosa E, et al. Levodopa with-
drawal after bilateral subthalamic nucleus stimulation in ad-vanced Parkinson disease. Arch Neurol 2000;57:983–988.
100. Landi A, Parolin M, Piolti R, et al. Deep brain stimulation for the
treatment of Parkinson’s disease: the experience of the neurosurgicaldepartment in Monza. Neurol Sci 2003;24(Suppl. 1):S43–S44.
101. Vesper J, Klostermann F, Stockhammer F, Funk T, Brock M.
Results of chronic subthalamic nucleus stimulation for Parkin-son’s disease: a 1-year follow-up study. Surg Neurol 2002;57:
306 –311.
102. Daniele A, Albanese A, Contarino MF, et al. Cognitive and
behavioural effects of chronic stimulation of the subthalamicnucleus in patients with Parkinson’s disease. J Neurol NeurosurgPsychiatry 2003;74:175–182.
103. Romito LM, Raja M, Daniele A, et al. Transient mania with
hypersexuality after surgery for high frequency stimulation of thesubthalamic nucleus in Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2002;17:1371–1374.
104. Thobois S, Mertens P, Guenot M, et al. Subthalamic nucleus
stimulation in Parkinson’s disease: clinical evaluation of 18 pa-tients. J Neurol 2002;249:529 –534.
105. Rodriguez-Oroz MC, Gorospe A, Guridi J, et al. Bilateral deep
brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson’s dis-ease. Neurology 2000;55(Suppl. 6):S45–S51.
106. Dujardin K, Defebvre L, Krystkowiak P, Blond S, Destee A.
Inﬂuence of chronic bilateral stimulation of the subthalamic nu-cleus on cognitive function in Parkinson’s disease. J Neurol2001;248:603– 611.
107. Pillon B, Ardouin C, Damier P, et al. Neuropsychological
changes between “OFF” and “ON” STN or GPi stimulation inParkinson’s disease. Neurology 2000;55:411– 418.
108. Berney A, Vingerhoets F, Perrin A, et al. Effect on mood of
subthalamic DBS for Parkinson’s disease: a consecutive series of24 patients. Neurology 2002;59:1427–1429.
109. Juurlink DN, Herrmann N, Szalai JP, Kopp A, Redelmeier DA.
Medical illness and the risk of suicide in the elderly. Arch InternMed 2004;164:1179 –1184.
110. Myslobodsky M, Lalonde FM, Hicks L. Are patients with Par-
kinson’s disease suicidal? J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol 2001;14:120 –124.
111. Alegret M, Junque C, Valldeoriola F, et al. Effects of bilateral
subthalamic stimulation on cognitive function in Parkinson dis-ease. Arch Neurol 2001;58:1223–1227.
112. Ardouin C, Pillon B, Peiffer E, et al. Bilateral subthalamic or
pallidal stimulation for Parkinson’s disease affects neither mem-ory nor executive functions: a consecutive series of 62 patients.Ann Neurol 1999;46:217–223.
113. Moretti R, Torre P, Antonello RM, et al. Cognitive changes
following subthalamic nucleus stimulation in two patients withParkinson disease. Percept Motor Skills 2002;95:477– 486.
114. Morrison CE, Borod JC, Brin MF, et al. A program for neuro-
psychological investigation of deep brain stimulation (PNIDBS)in movement disorder patients: development, feasibility, and pre-liminary data. Neuropsychiatry Neuropsychol Behav Neurol2000;13:204 –219.
115. Perozzo P, Rizzone M, Bergamasco B, et al. Deep brain stimu-
lation of the subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson’s disease: compar-ison of pre- and postoperative neuropsychological evaluation.J Neurol Sci 2001;192:9 –15.
116. Schneider F, Habel U, Volkmann J, et al. Deep brain stimulation
of the subthalamic nucleus enhances emotional processing inParkinson disease. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2003;60:296 –302.
117. Agid Y. Parkinson’s disease: pathophysiology. Lancet 1991;337:
1321–1324.
118. Dujardin K, Krystkowiak P, Defebvre L, Blond S, Destee A. A case
of severe dysexecutive syndrome consecutive to chronic bilateralpallidal stimulation. Neuropsychologia 2000;38:1305–1315.
119. Jahanshahi M, Ardouin CM, Brown RG, et al. The impact of deep
brain stimulation on executive function in Parkinson’s disease.Brain 2000;123(Pt. 6):1142–1154.
120. Funkiewiez A, Ardouin C, Krack P, et al. Acute psychotropic
effects of bilateral subthalamic nucleus stimulation and levodopain Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2003;18:524 –530.
121. Brusa L, Pierantozzi M, Peppe A, et al. Deep brain stimulation
(DBS) attentional effects parallel those of l-dopa treatment.J Neural Transm 2001;108:1021–1027.S236 G. DEUSCHL ET AL.
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006
 15318257, 2006, S14, Downloaded from https://movementdisorders.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mds.20957 by University Of Waterloo Dana Porter Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
122. Moro E, Scerrati M, Romito LM, Roselli R, Tonali P, Albanese
A. Chronic subthalamic nucleus stimulation reduces medicationrequirements in Parkinson’s disease. Neurology 1999;53:85–90.
123. Saint-Cyr JA, Trepanier LL, Kumar R, Lozano AM, Lang AE.
Neuropsychological consequences of chronic bilateral stimula-tion of the subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson’s disease. Brain2000;123(Pt. 10):2091–2108.
124. Funkiewiez A, Ardouin C, Caputo E, et al. Long term effects of
bilateral subthalamic nucleus stimulation on cognitive function,mood, and behaviour in Parkinson’s disease. J Neurol NeurosurgPsychiatry 2004;75:834 – 839.
125. Trepanier LL, Kumar R, Lozano AM, Lang AE, Saint-Cyr JA.
Neuropsychological outcome of GPi pallidotomy and GPi or STNdeep brain stimulation in Parkinson’s disease. Brain Cogn 2000;42:324 –347.
126. Miyawaki E, Perlmutter JS, Tro ¨ster AI, Videen TO, Koller WC.
The behavioral complications of pallidal stimulation: a case re-port. Brain Cogn 2000;42:417– 434.
127. Roane D, Yu M, Feinberg T, Rogers J. Hypersexuality after
pallidal surgery in Parkinson disease. Neuropsychiatry Neuropsy-chol Behav Neurol 2002;15:247–251.
128. Higginson C, Fields J, Tro ¨ster A. Which symptoms of anxiety
diminish after surgical interventions for Parkinson disease? Neu-ropsychiatry Neuropsychol Behav Neurol 2001;14:117–121.
129. Merello M, Nouzeilles M, Kuzis G, et al. Unilateral radiofre-
quency lesion versus electrostimulation of posteroventral palli-dum: a prospective randomized comparison. Mov Disord 1999;14:50 –56.
130. Fields JA, Tro ¨ster AI, Wilkinson SB, Pahwa R, Koller WC.
Cognitive outcome following staged bilateral pallidal stimulationfor the treatment of Parkinson’s disease. Clin Neurol Neurosurg1999;101:182–188.
131. Tro ¨ster AI, Fields JA, Wilkinson SB, et al. Unilateral pallidal
stimulation for Parkinson’s disease: neurobehavioral functioningbefore and 3 months after electrode implantation. Neurology1997;49:1078 –1083.
132. Vingerhoets G, van der Linden C, Lannoo E, et al. Cognitive
outcome after unilateral pallidal stimulation in Parkinson’s dis-ease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1999;66:297–304.
133. Caparros-Lefebvre D, Blond S, Pecheux N, Pasquier F, Petit H.
Neuropsychological evaluation before and after thalamic stimu-lation in 9 patients with Parkinson disease. Rev Neurol (Paris)1992;148:117–122.
134. Schuurman P, Bruins J, Merkus M, Bosch D, Speelman J. A
comparison of neuropsychological effects of thalamotomy andthalamic stimulation. Neurology 2002;59:1232–1239.
135. Tro ¨ster AI, Fields JA, Wilkinson SB, et al. Neuropsychological
functioning before and after unilateral thalamic stimulating elec-trode implantation in Parkinson’s disease. Neurosurg Focus 1997;2:Manuscript 9 (electronic manuscript).
136. Woods SP, Fields JA, Lyons KE, et al. Neuropsychological and
quality of life changes following unilateral thalamic deep brainstimulation in Parkinson’s disease: a one-year follow-up. ActaNeurochir 2001;143:1273–1277.
137. Capus L, Melatini A, Zorzon M, et al. Chronic bilateral electrical
stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus for the treatment of ad-vanced Parkinson’s disease. Neurol Sci 2001;22:57–58.
138. Lopiano L, Rizzone M, Bergamasco B, et al. Deep brain stimu-
lation of the subthalamic nucleus: clinical effectiveness andsafety. Neurology 2001;56:552–554.
139. Krause M, Fogel W, Heck A, et al. Deep brain stimulation for the
treatment of Parkinson’s disease: subthalamic nucleus versus globuspallidus internus. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2001;70:464 – 470.
140. Pinter MM, Alesch F, Murg M, Seiwald M, Helscher RJ, Binder
H. Deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus for controlof extrapyramidal features in advanced idiopathic parkinson’sdisease: one year follow-up. J Neural Transm 1999;106:693–709.
141. Hristova A, Lyons K, Tro ¨ster AI, Pahwa R, Wilkinson SB, Koller
WC. Effect and time course of deep brain stimulation of theglobus pallidus and subthalamus on motor features of Parkinson’s
disease. Clin Neuropharmacol 2000;23:208 –211.
142. Pahwa R, Wilkinson S, Smith D, Lyons K, Miyawaki E, Koller
WC. High-frequency stimulation of the globus pallidus for thetreatment of Parkinson’s disease. Neurology 1997;49:249 –253.
143. Blond S, Siegfried J. Thalamic stimulation for the treatment of
tremor and other movement disorders. Acta Neurochir 1991;52(Suppl.):109 –111.
144. Pollak P, Benabid AL, Gervason CL, Hoffmann D, Seigneuret E,
Perret J. Long-term effects of chronic stimulation of the ventralintermediate thalamic nucleus in different types of tremor. AdvNeurol 1993;60:408 – 413.
145. Pollak P, Benabid AL, Limousin P, Benazzouz A. Chronic intra-
cerebral stimulation in Parkinson’s disease. Adv Neurol 1997;74:213–220.
146. Tasker RR. Deep brain stimulation is preferable to thalamotomy
for tremor suppression. Surg Neurol 1998;49:145–153.
147. Rehncrona S, Johnels B, Widner H, Tornqvist AL, Hariz M, Sydow
O. Long-term efﬁcacy of thalamic deep brain stimulation for tremor:double-blind assessments. Mov Disord 2003;18:163–170.
148. Beric A, Kelly PJ, Rezai A, et al. Complications of deep brain
stimulation surgery. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg 2001;77:73–78.
149. Hamel W, Schrader B, Weinert D, et al. Technical complication in deep
brain stimulation. Zentralblatt Neurochirurgie 2002;63:124 –127.
150. Hariz MI. Complications of deep brain stimulation surgery. Mov
Disord 2002;17(Suppl. 3):S162–S166.
151. Joint C, Nandi D, Parkin S, Gregory R, Aziz T. Hardware-related
problems of deep brain stimulation. Mov Disord 2002;17(Suppl.3):S175–S180.
152. Kumar R, Lozano AM, Sime E, Lang AE. Long-term follow-up
of thalamic deep brain stimulation for essential and parkinsoniantremor. Neurology 2003;61:1601–1604.
153. Merello M, Cammarota A, Leiguarda R, Pikielny R. Delayed intra-
cerebral electrode infection after bilateral STN implantation forParkinson’s disease: case report. Mov Disord 2001;16:168 –170.
154. Oh MY, Abosch A, Kim SH, Lang AE, Lozano AM. Long-term
hardware-related complications of deep brain stimulation. Neu-rosurgery 2002;50:1268 –1274.
155. Pollak P, Fraix V, Krack P, et al. Treatment results: Parkinson’s
disease. Mov Disord 2002;17(Suppl. 3):S75–S83.
156. Schwalb JM, Riina HA, Skolnick B, Jaggi JL, Simuni T, Baltuch
GH. Revision of deep brain stimulator for tremor: technical note.J Neurosurg 2001;94:1010 –1012.
157. Lyons KE, Wilkinson SB, Overman J, Pahwa R. Surgical and
hardware complications of subthalamic stimulation: a series of160 procedures. Neurology 2004;63:612– 616.
158. Alesch F. Sudden failure of dual channel pulse generators. Mov
Disord 2005;20:64 – 66.
159. Tronnier VM, Staubert A, Hahnel S, Sarem-Aslani A. Magnetic
resonance imaging with implanted neurostimulators: an in vitroand in vivo study. Neurosurgery 1999;44:118 –125.
160. Perozzo P, Rizzone M, Bergamasco B, et al. Deep brain stimu-
lation of subthalamic nucleus: behavioural modiﬁcations andfamiliar relations. Neurol Sci 2001;22:81– 82.
161. Aarsland D, Andersen K, Larsen JP, Lolk A, Kragh-Sorensen P.
Prevalence and characteristics of dementia in Parkinson disease:an 8-year prospective study. Arch Neurol 2003;60:387–392.
162. Braak H, Braak E. Pathoanatomy of Parkinson’s disease. J Neurol
2000;247(Suppl. 2):II3–II10.
163. Emre M, Aarsland D, Albanese A, et al. Rivastigmine for demen-
tia associated with Parkinson’s disease. N Engl J Med 2004;351:2509 –2518.
164. Nutt JG, Anderson VC, Peacock JH, Hammerstad JP, Burchiel
KJ. DBS and diathermy interaction induces severe CNS damage.Neurology 2001;56:1384 –1386.
165. Rosenow JM, Tarkin H, Zias E, Sorbera C, Mogilner A. Simul-
taneous use of bilateral subthalamic nucleus stimulators and animplantable cardiac deﬁbrillator: case report. J Neurosurg 2003;99:167–169.POSTOPERATIVE ISSUES S237
Movement Disorders, Vol. 21, Suppl. 14, 2006
 15318257, 2006, S14, Downloaded from https://movementdisorders.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/mds.20957 by University Of Waterloo Dana Porter Library, Wiley Online Library on [05/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
