Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Clinical Neurology and Neurosurgery
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/clineuro
Artiﬁcial intelligence for assisting diagnostics and assessment of Parkinson ’s
disease —A review
Minja Beli ća, Vladislava Bobi ća,b,⁎, Milica Badž aa,b, Nikola Šolajab, Milica Đurić-Jovi čića,
Vladimir S. Kosti ćc
aInnovation Center, School of Electrical Engineering, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia
bSchool of Electrical Engineering, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia
cClinic of Neurology, School of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Artiﬁcial intelligence
Machine learningParkinson ’s disease
Diagnostics
Assessment
KinematicsMotion analysisABSTRACT
Artiﬁcial intelligence, speci ﬁcally machine learning, has found numerous applications in computer-aided di-
agnostics, monitoring and management of neurodegenerative movement disorders of parkinsonian type. These
tasks are not trivial due to high inter-subject variability and similarity of clinical presentations of di ﬀerent
neurodegenerative disorders in the early stages. This paper aims to give a comprehensive, high-level overview ofapplications of arti ﬁcial intelligence through machine learning algorithms in kinematic analysis of movement
disorders, speci ﬁcally Parkinson ’s disease (PD). We surveyed papers published between January 2007 and
January 2019, within online databases, including PubMed and Science Direct, with a focus on the most recentlypublished studies. The search encompassed papers dealing with the implementation of machine learning algo-
rithms for diagnosis and assessment of PD using data describing motion of upper and lower extremities. This
systematic review presents an overview of 48 relevant studies published in the abovementioned period, whichinvestigate the use of arti ﬁcial intelligence for diagnostics, therapy assessment and progress prediction in PD
based on body kinematics. Di ﬀerent machine learning algorithms showed promising results, particularly for
early PD diagnostics. The investigated publications demonstrated the potentials of collecting data from af-fordable and globally available devices. However, to fully exploit artiﬁ cial intelligence technologies in the fu-
ture, more widespread collaboration is advised among medical institutions, clinicians and researchers, to fa-
cilitate aligning of data collection protocols, sharing and merging of data sets.
1. Introduction
Healthcare is one of the most prominent fertile ﬁelds for develop-
ment and implementation of advanced and emerging technologies, in-
cluding arti ﬁcial intelligence, wearable sensors, augmented and virtual
reality, 3D printing and others [ 1–6]. Arti ﬁcial intelligence (AI) is a
growing ﬁeld covering a wide range of technologies that aim to imitate
cognitive functions and intelligent behaviour of humans [ 1]. AI is now
ubiquitous, showing extraordinary abilities in countless areas, from
autonomous vehicles to robot-assisted surgery. Although AI is a broad
ﬁeld, its recent growth has been greatly brought by new advances and
improvements in machine learning [ 4]. Machine learning (ML) re-
presents a subset of AI and includes powerful algorithms that provide
systems with the ability to explore and ﬁnd patterns within data,
classify and predict outcomes by learning through experience [ 4]. MLhas also found its signi ﬁcant place in healthcare, contributing to diag-
nostics, disease management, progression monitoring and outcome
prediction [ 1]. This sort of approach has also penetrated neurology. ML
algorithms coupled with wearable devices have addressed di ﬀerent
challenges regarding neurodegenerative movement disorders, including
Parkinson ’s disease (PD) [ 7].
A study investigating the accuracy of traditional methods for clin-
ical diagnosis, using post-mortem neuropathological examination,
found a clinical diagnosis of PD to have sensitivity and speci ﬁcity of
88% and 68%, respectively [ 8]. Early diagnosis was particularly un-
reliable, correctly recognizing as PD only 26% of patients who were
untreated or not clearly responsive, and 53% of those responsive to
medication. The most important clinical features of PD are tremor,
bradykinesia, rigidity, and postural instability [ 9]. These motor symp-
toms a ﬀect upper and lower extremities and hinder patients ’
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clineuro.2019.105442
Received 13 March 2019; Received in revised form 31 May 2019; Accepted 11 July 2019⁎Corresponding author at: Innovation Center, School of Electrical Engineering, University of Belgrade, 11120, Belgrade, Serbia.
E-mail addresses: minja.n.belic@gmail.com (M. Beli ć),vladislava.bobic@ic.etf.bg.ac.rs (V. Bobi ć),milica.badza@ic.etf.bg.ac.rs (M. Bad ža),
sn183153m@student.etf.bg.ac.rs (N.Šolaja), milica.djuric@etf.bg.ac.rs (M. Đuri ć-Jovi čić),vladimir.s.kostic@gmail.com (V.S. Kosti ć).Clinical Neurology and Neurosurgery 184 (2019) 105442
Available online 16 July 2019
0303-8467/ © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Tperformance of everyday routine tasks, which can be visible from the
earliest stages of the disease. Therefore, evaluation of these symptoms
through analysis of body movements represents a very important part
of the clinical assessment and diagnosis of PD.
Since reliable diagnostics and early stage detection are one of the
top priorities in medical practice [ 10], a lot of e ﬀort is being invested in
the development of new methods for diagnostic support, which wouldincrease the accuracy and minimize required time and resources. In-
formation on the patient ’s condition (ON/OFF states, the occurrence of
dyskinesias, falls) and symptoms (tremor, bradykinesia, freezing ofgait) outside of clinical settings could provide physicians with deeper
insight into patients ’disease severity and progress, setting the path
towards fully personalized treatment. Support tools based on the use ofML have great potential for clinical practice increasing accuracy, re-
liability and e ﬃciency of clinical decision making and assessment [ 11].
Machine learning approaches are frequently used for outputting a di-agnostic suggestion, using data collected from various media [ 12]. In
addition, ML has found its application in real-time, remote monitoringand detection of PD severity, symptoms and response to therapy.
The aim of this paper is to give a comprehensive, high-level over-
view of the bene ﬁts that AI and speci ﬁcally ML have brought to diag-
nosis and management of PD, as well as instrumentation and technol-ogies which enabled it.
2. Methods
Selection criteria for presented publications were based on the im-
plementation of machine learning algorithms for diagnosis and assess-
ment of PD using data describing body motions, including movements
of upper and lower extremities and whole-body movements. The search
included both conventional machine learning and deep learning algo-
rithms [ 13]. Most of the included studies applied conventional machine
learning algorithms with supervised learning for ﬁnding desired pat-
terns in the collected, labelled data. Those algorithms use hand-crafted
features, extracted from the raw data by means of di ﬀerent signal
processing techniques. In this paper, we included some of the mostcommonly used algorithms: Support Vector Machine - SVM (both linear
and non-linear), Support Vector Regression - SVR, Naïve Bayes - NB,
Logistic Regression –LR, Arti ﬁcial Neural Network –ANN (including
Probabilistic Neural Network –PNN, Radial Basis Function Neural
Network –RBF NN, Extreme Machine Learning –EML and Dynamic
Neural Networks - DNN), k-Nearest Neighbours - kNN, Linear Dis-criminant Analysis - LDA, Tree-based algorithms - TREE (including
Decision Trees –DT, Random Forest –RF, Random Trees –RT, Ada
Boost DT, C4.5 DT, BAG DT), Hidden Markov Models –HMM, Evolu-
tionary algorithms (EVOL), whereas some researchers applied en-
sembles of di ﬀerent algorithms (ENS). Studies that are included are
providing meaningful results, i.e. contributing to the challenges thatneed to be resolved in terms of detection and classi ﬁcation performance
and providing promising results for remote monitoring of diseasesymptoms and response to therapy. The performance criteria were
analysed together with dataset size and used instrumentation. We have
selected the papers that included PD patients with speci ﬁed disease
stage and scores, such as Hoehn and Yahr score (H&Y), Uniﬁ ed
 Par-
kinson ’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS), especially part III that covers
examination scores for upper and lower extremity motions [ 14]. The
diagnosis was considered as early if the recruited patients had a H&Y
score of 2 or less, unless stated otherwise. The observed instrumenta-
tion included systems providing arms and legs kinematic data, which
included wearable systems and camera motion capture systems. Wesurveyed papers published between January 2007 and January 2019,
within online databases including PubMed, Science Direct, and more,
using combinations of the keywords given below. Articles were re-
stricted to the English language. The initial query yielded 1100 papers
and was ﬁltered to 488 by the scope/subjects/methodology, from
which 48 articles were found to be relevant and match our criteria. Thefollowing keywords were used for searching the literature: Machine
learning, deep learning, arti ﬁcial intelligence, intelligent devices, smart sys-
tems, classi ﬁcation, pattern recognition, data mining. The above keywords
have been combined with the following: neurodegenerative disorders,
movement disorders, Parkinson ’s disease, wearables, diagnostics, freezing of
gait, kinematic analysis, upper extremities, lower extremities, inertial sen-sors, motion capture, UPDRS, tremor, ﬁnger tapping, leg agility .
3. Results
Based on the search and stated selection criteria, 48 publications
were found which matched the abovementioned criteria and success-fully applied ML to kinematic datasets acquired from patients with PD,
20 of which analysed upper extremity kinematics, 15 papers considered
lower extremity kinematics, and 13 analysed kinematics of full body
(upper and lower extremities concurrently). The implementation of ML
for PD is organized in two subgroups: 1) algorithms for diagnostic
support and 2) algorithms for disease monitoring and kinematic as-
sessment.
3.1. Upper extremities
Intelligent algorithms are often applied on kinematic signals ac-
quired from upper extremities of patients with PD for provision of ad-
ditional diagnostic support, assessment of therapeutic e ﬀects and
monitoring and evaluation of motor symptoms, especially hand tremorand bradykinesia [ 15,16].
Numerous research groups have investigated the implementation of
diﬀerent algorithms and instrumentation, as well as tested various
protocols in order to ﬁnd the optimal solution which would provide the
best possible results in early-stage diagnostics, assessment of diseaseseverity and monitoring, as well as PD progress prediction [ 15].
3.1.1. Assisting diagnostics with advanced hand motion analysis techniques
A lot of e ﬀort has been put into the development of systems that use
advanced algorithms for diagnosis and early diagnosis of PD based on
the properties of hand movements. By using simple instrumentation,
such as standard computer keyboards [ 17–19], smartphone integrated
inertial sensors [ 20–22], electromagnetic sensors [ 23], wearable in-
ertial sensors [ 24] and video camera [ 25], researchers have gathered
motion data describing di ﬀerent tasks that are traditionally used for
evaluation of PD in clinical settings. This primarily includes analysis of
ﬁnger tapping and action/rest tremor tasks included in the standardized
clinical UPDRS scale, part III [ 14].
 Literature suggests that machine
learning algorithms signi ﬁcantly improve di ﬀerentiation between PD
patients and healthy participants compared to results achieved inclinical practice. Studies di ﬀer in the number of recruited subjects,
disease stages, applied analysis and instrumentation, showing increasedaccuracy of classi ﬁcation between PD patients and healthy controls
(HC) for more advanced disease stages and larger datasets. The im-plementation of ML algorithms for PD diagnosis and their results when
applied to upper limb kinematic data are shown in Fig. 1 (upper panel).
Each study is shown as an individual marker, coded with shape, sizeand colour, representing di ﬀerent instrumentation, number of patients
and performance measures respectively. The performance is presentedin terms of sensitivity (Se), speci ﬁcity (Sp) and accuracy (Ac). The
ﬁgure shows the most frequently used or the most successful supervised
ML algorithms obtained as a representative subset of all reviewed
publications. Columns are organized alphabetically according to the
used algorithm: ANN, ENS, EVOL, kNN, LR, NB, SVM and TREE.
Interesting observations can be made when comparing the sensi-
tivity and speci ﬁcity of the results obtained by some algorithms.
Diagnostics based on tremor recordings provided by smartphones and
processed by NB, LR and SVM algorithms provided the Se:Sp ratio of
56%:100%, 74%:100%, 56%:100%, respectively, proving these algo-
rithms to have high credibility for identifying HC from PD, but leavingM. Beli ć, et al. Clinical Neurology and Neurosurgery 184 (2019) 105442
2certain doubt as for whether all PD could be diagnosed [ 22]. BAG DT,
AdaBoost, and C4.5 algorithms gave comparable results, and showed
increased sensitivity and decreased speci ﬁcity compared to the previous
three algorithms [ 22], concretely with Se:Sp ratios of 82%:90%,
83%:85% and 83%:75%, respectively. When it comes to early diag-
nostics, researchers reported Ac = 95% based on tremor analysis using
smartphone and Arti ﬁcial Neural Networks [ 20], and Se = 96% paired
with Sp = 97% based on keyboard typing analysis using an ensemble of8d iﬀerent ML models [ 18]. However, comparing algorithm perfor-
mance is highly sensitive to the collected dataset and its pre-processing,as shown by Giancardo et al. [ 17] and Arroyo-Gallego et al. [ 19] who
used a standard keyboard and SVR algorithms to detect early PD, andachieved Se:Sp of 71%:84%, and 77%:72%, respectively. It is particu-
larly interesting that these results were achieved using recordings made
by standard smartphones or computer keyboards which are nowadays
globally present and a ﬀordable. This means there is a much greater
potential for implementation of such standardized procedures in anysetting - clinical or home, city clinic or rural medical o ﬃce.
3.1.2. Following disease progress and response to therapy
Another approach to this topic includes the use of intelligent algo-
rithms for objective assessment of motor symptoms and a more e ﬃcient
evaluation of disease severity based on the standard clinical tests. Inclinical practice, those tests are visually observed and assessed by
physicians, which may result in rough resolution and subjective eva-
luation [ 26]. Researchers have therefore been working on the devel-
opment of ML-based systems for objective and automated evaluation ofsymptoms severity based on the standardized motor tasks, including
tremor [ 27,28] and ﬁnger tapping [ 25,29] or other repetitive motions
[30]. As the input to those intelligent algorithms, researchers have
provided features describing clinically important parameters, such as
tremor frequency [ 27], rhythmicity, frequency and amplitude of re-
petitive movements [ 30]. In Fig. 1, lower panel, we present results for
most commonly used supervised ML algorithms for assessment of PD
patients based on the upper extremity kinematic data. Results are
presented in a similar manner as in Fig. 1, upper panel.
Cloud-based mobile applications that use ML have also been de-
veloped with the aim of increasing e ﬃciency of examination of pa-
tients ’motor abilities and symptoms severity [ 31,32]. Stamate et al.
[32] developed CloudUPDRS - a mobile application that allows remote
recording of UPDRS tasks, such as tremor, ﬁnger tapping, and gait. It
integrates a deep learning algorithm for discrimination between highand low-quality recordings. Machine learning is also applied for de-
tection and classi ﬁcation
of patients ’conditions and everyday activities[33,34] which can provide insight into medication e ﬃciency and pro-
vide information that can be crucial for a patient-tailored treatmentplan. Fisher et al. [ 34] applied Arti ﬁcial Neural Networks on data de-
rived from a wrist-worn accelerometer for automatic detection ofasleep, ON, OFF and dyskinesia states in home settings. The results
showed that di ﬀerent ON/OFF states and dyskinesia can be detected
with low Se and high Sp (above 80%). Comparable results were ob-tained using deep learning algorithms [ 33]. Both conventional machine
learning [ 35,36] and deep learning algorithms [ 36] were used for the
detection and classi ﬁcation of bradykinesia and dyskinesia with high
accuracy (ranging from 84% up to 90%).
3.2. Lower extremities
Advanced algorithms have also been applied to the development of
new diagnostic and assessment systems that are based on the motion of
the lower extremities [ 15]. Diﬀerent approaches have been taken,
covering a wide range of algorithms and instrumentation. In this paper,the focus is given on the use of ML algorithms for diagnostics, especially
early-stage diagnostics, prediction and detection of motor symptoms
inﬂuencing normal walking (such as freezing of gait, falls), prediction
of disease severity and assessment of therapy response [ 15,16].
3.2.1. Assisting diagnostics with advanced gait analysis techniques
Research groups have been working on developing the optimal al-
gorithm for accurate diagnostics of PD, implementing di ﬀerent machine
learning algorithms to datasets collected from infrared cameras (Kinect
or motion capture with optical markers) [ 37–40], force sensors placed
in shoe insoles or integrated into sensor walkways, [ 41–44], and in-
ertial sensors positioned on leg segments, waist, or integrated in smart
shoes [ 45–51]. A signi ﬁcant contribution was provided by studies that
focused on algorithms for early PD diagnostics, where the kNN algo-rithm reached Ac = 85.5% [ 51]. Using SVM provided 85% or higher
accuracy, con ﬁrmed by di ﬀerent studies [ 42,43]. LDA algorithm ob-
tained Se:Sp of 88%:86% for early-stage PD diagnostics (de ﬁned by
UPDRS score below 15) using walking data, while both parameters formild stage PD (de ﬁned by UPDRS score above 20) were 100% using
features extracted from data describing three di ﬀerent
exercises [ 47].
Using RBF NN provided Se, Sp and Ac of 96.77%, 95.89%, and 96.39%,respectively, when applied on a PhysioBank dataset which included 93
PD patients with moderate or early disease stage [ 44]. In Fig. 2, upper
panel, we present results for most commonly used supervised ML al-gorithms for assisting diagnosis of PD patients based on lower extremity
kinematic data. Results are presented in a similar manner as in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. Implementation of machine learning on
upper extremity kinematic data for diagnosis
(upper panel) and assessment (lower panel),showing top ML algorithms (one in each
column), their performance (the horizontal
axis shows the presented measure, the verticalaxis shows its percentage value), used in-
strumentation (indicated by marker shape),
and number of patients (indicated by markersize). ANN –Artiﬁcial Neural Network; ENS –
Ensemble of di ﬀerent algorithms; EVOL –
Evolutionary algorithms; kNN –k-Nearest
Neighbours; LR –Logistic Regression; NB –
Naïve Bayes; SVM –Support Vector Machine;
TREE –Tree-based algorithms; Ac –Accuracy;
Se–Sensitivity; Sp –Speciﬁcity; EM tracking -
Electromagnetic tracking; IMU –Inertial
Measurement Unit.M. Beli ć, et al. Clinical Neurology and Neurosurgery 184 (2019) 105442
33.2.2. Following disease progress and response to therapy
Another major ﬁeld of application for machine learning algorithms
is detection and prediction of freezing of gait (FoG) and falls. Wearable
sensors have been particularly exploited [ 52], owing to their suitability
for home use and recording along complicated paths with turns,doorways and narrow walkways. Sensors are typically mounted on the
legs and waist [ 53–55], but sometimes also on the wrist and chest
[56,57]. As smartphones have profoundly in ﬁltrated our daily lives,
with integrated inertial sensors, they also found their role as un-
obtrusive FoG detection equipment and gait-based diagnosis assistants
[58]. Integration with a smart watch has also been suggested [ 59]. One
of the most frequent approaches for FoG detection was using SVM al-gorithms. Polynomial kernel SVM provided Sp = 91% and Se = 89%
for FoG detection, whereas these measures were Sp = 88% andSe = 75% for prediction of FoG events [ 55]. Other algorithms im-
plemented for the same application were NB, RF, kNN, ANN, linearSVM and Extreme Gradient Boosting, but their performance was found
to be lower compared to Polynomial kernel SVM [ 55]. Another study
compared the performance of generalized and personalized FoG de-tection models based on SVM algorithms and showed that the gen-
eralized model reached Sp = 79% and Se = 74.7%, compared to
Sp = 80.1% and Se = 88.1% obtained for personalized algorithms
[54]. Using non-linear SVM introduced lower performance compared to
linear SVM, showing accuracy of Ac = 94.2% compared to Ac = 95.4%[53]. Prediction of incoming FoG would further improve its manage-
ment. Mazilu et al. [ 60] worked on identifying patterns in motion data
using unsupervised learning, but they found signi ﬁcant variations be-
tween subjects. In Fig. 2, lower panel, we present summary results for
the most commonly used ML algorithms for FoG detection in PD pa-
tients based on lower extremity kinematic data. Results are presented in
a similar fashion as in Fig. 1 .
Studies estimated fall frequency as well as demographic and clinical
factors related to falling in a cohort of Serbian patients with PD and
showed that 60% of 300 observed patients had falls in the 6-month
period prior to the study [ 61,62]. Therefore, ML algorithms and smart
wearable technologies found a signi ﬁcant role in fall detection and
prediction. Although threshold-based algorithms are easier to imple-
ment and they are less computationally demanding, machine learning
methods are prevalent due to much better prediction rates [ 63]. As for
the type of systems used, wearable and camera-based systems arepredominant methods for fall detection, the former being favoured
[63,64].
Another implementation of ML for gait was shown by Jane et al.
[41] who designed an automated scale for detecting the severity of gaitdisturbances according to the H&Y scale using a Q-backpropagated
time-delay neural network on data collected by wearable sensors with
the accuracy of about 90%. A SVM classi ﬁer was applied in one of the
phases of the motor ﬂuctuation (ON/OFF) detection using gait data
recorded by 3D accelerometer sensor, which resulted in both Se and Sp
above 90% [ 65].
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) e ﬀects on ground re-
action force data were also assessed with machine learning algorithms:PNN, LR, and SVM, showing the positive e ﬀect of DBS on walking
patterns, especially combined with medications [ 66].
3.3. Upper and lower extremities
Some research groups used data from both upper and lower ex-
tremities to analyse motion and extract features for early or mild PD
diagnostics [ 38,46,49], PD staging [ 49,50], detection of FoG and/or
dyskinesia [ 56,67], tremor [ 67–69], bradykinesia [ 58,68], as well as to
perform assessment of dose-responsive dyskinesia [ 67].
A combination of inertial sensors on the dominant limbs with some
other sensors (vibration, infrared, magnetic door, ambient light) on the
dominant arm recorded data during daily activities for discerning be-
tween HC, PD patients with and without cognitive impairments, and
patients with cognitive impairment (but no PD) [ 38]. Di ﬀerent results
were reported, showing that these four groups can be discriminatedwith accuracy of 86% using the AdaBoost DT algorithm. Comparison of
HC and PD patients based on inertial data acquired from upper and
lower body parts resulted with accuracy ranging from 79.62% to 84.1%
for LDA, NB, kNN, SVM (linear), SVM (non-linear) and DT, and accu-
racy above 90% for an ensemble of classi ﬁers [ 50]. The authors also
used SVM for discrimination between HC and PD patients with H&Y I, H&Y II, H&Y III with the accuracy of 94.5%, 87.75%, 93.63%, respec-
tively. Other studies compared results for diagnosing PD patients with
three disease stages based on a combination of H&Y and UPDRS scores
(mild, moderate and severe) using inertial motion data from legs and
wrists, with the help of three classi ﬁers: EML, PNN, and kNN [ 49]. By
using the kinematic data from upper and lower limbs, estimation oftremor severity was performed with HMM classi ﬁer achieving accuracy
of 87% [ 69]. Tremor, bradykinesia, and dyskinesia can be assessed with
performance above 90% using the SVM [ 68] and DNN [ 67]. Similar
results were reported for FoG detection, reporting accuracy above 90%
for NB, RF, DT and RT classi ﬁers. In Fig. 3, we present results for most
commonly used or most successful ML algorithms for diagnosis andassessment of PD patients based on both upper and lower extremity
kinematic data. Results are presented in a similar manner as in Figs. 1
and 2 .
Fig. 2. Implementation of machine learning on
lower extremity kinematic data for diagnosis
(upper panel) and FOG detection (lowerpanel), showing top ML algorithms (one in
each column), their performance (the hor-
izontal axis shows presented measure, thevertical shows its percentage value), used in-
strumentation (indicated by marker shape),
and number of patients (indicated by markersize). ANN –Artiﬁcial Neural Network; kNN –
k-Nearest Neighbours; LDA –Linear
Discriminant Analysis; LR –Linear Regression;
NB–Naïve Bayes; SVM –Support Vector
Machine; TREE –Tree-based algorithms; Ac –
Accuracy; Se –Sensitivity; Sp –Speciﬁcity;
IMU –Inertial Measurement Unit.M. Beli ć, et al. Clinical Neurology and Neurosurgery 184 (2019) 105442
4The summarized results are presented in Table 1. The table com-
prises selection of papers presented in the review which are providing
promising results for diagnosis and assessment of PD patients, using
diﬀerent algorithms, measurement protocols and instrumentations re-
cording kinematic data from di ﬀerent body parts.
4. Discussion
In this paper, we presented some of the most prominent results from
theﬁeld of arti ﬁcial intelligence, speci ﬁcally machine learning, applied
with the goal of providing a more precise diagnosis and assessment of
patients with PD. The paper focused on the implementation of com-
mercial and o ﬀ-the-shelf instrumentation for capturing motor patterns
of upper and lower extremities.
The obtained results were found to be comparable for di ﬀerentsensor systems, which proves their equal potential for practical use interms of classi ﬁcation and detection accuracy. However, the applic-
ability of camera and motion capture systems are limited because theyare more expensive and require dedicated space for recording. On the
other hand, wearable sensor devices are a ﬀordable and allow mon-
itoring in any environment. As shown, smartphones are also frequentlyused without any additional instrumentation, since they already haveintegrated inertial sensors, and they are globally available, enabling the
easy realization of various assessment and assistive applications. They
are an inexpensive option with simple wireless data transmission [ 71].
Although the quality of the sensors di ﬀers for di ﬀerent models, and
battery life can be a burning issue, the obtained high accuracy results
paired with usability and a ﬀordability, make smart wearable devices an
important part of the future development of the telemonitoring of PD.
Machine learning applications in this ﬁeld can be divided into two
Fig. 3. Implementation of machine learning on
both upper and lower extremity kinematic data
for diagnosis (upper panel) and assessment(lower panel), showing top ML algorithms (one
in each column), their performance (the hor-
izontal axis shows presented measure, thevertical shows its percentage value), used in-
strumentation (indicated by marker shape),
and number of patients (indicated by markersize). ANN –Artiﬁcial Neural Network; ENS –
Ensemble of di ﬀerent algorithms; HMM –
Hidden Markov Models; kNN –k-Nearest
Neighbours; LDA –Linear Discriminant
Analysis; NB –Naïve Bayes; SVM –Support
Vector Machine; TREE –Tree-based algo-
rithms; Ac –Accuracy; Se –Sensitivity; Sp –
Speciﬁcity; IMU –Inertial Measurement Unit.
Table 1A selection of papers providing promising results for di ﬀerent applications based on movements of di ﬀerent body parts, using di ﬀerent instrumentation, protocols
and algorithms.
Ref. Goal Type of observed motion Body part Instrumentation Subjects Algorithm Best performance [%]
Sp Se Ac
[29] Diagnosis Finger tapping Up EM tracking 107 PD, 49 HC EVOL 91.8 94.6 93.5
[18] Diagnosis Typing Up Keyboard 20 PD (mild), 33 HC ENS 97 96
[20] Diagnosis Arm movements at rest, waving
and walkingUp Smartphone 21 PD (> 1 year), 21
HCANN 95 95 95
[25] UPDRS scoring FT Up Video 13 PD (UPDRS: 0-3) SVM 88
[27] UPDRS scoring Hand tremor Up Smartphone 52 PD NB 97
[29] UPDRS scoring FT Up EM tracking 107 PD, 49 HC EVOL ≥89.7
[44] Diagnosis Gait Low Force sensor 93 PD (mild and
early), 73 HCANN 95.89 96.77 96.38
[45] Diagnosis Gait, Posture Low Smartphone 10 PD, 10 HC RF 97.6 98.5 98.0
[51] Diagnosis Gait Low IMU 156 PD, 424 HC kNN 85.51
[53] FoG detection Gait Low IMU 20 PD (H&Y > 2) Linear SVM 95.6 82.2 95.4
[40] Diagnosis Gait Low Camera system & force
plate23 PD (H&Y: 2), 26
HCRF 90 96 92.6
[67] Classi ﬁcation of severity of
motor disordersUnconstrained activity All Multimodal 19 PD, 4 non-PD ANN 97.1 94.9
[68] Assessment FtN, FT, HOC, HT, SIT, HA All IMU 12 PD (H&Y: 2-3) SVM > 95
[58] Diagnosis Gait, Posture, FT, RT All Smartphone 10 PD, 10 HC RF 96.9 96.2
[50] Diagnosis (PD - H&Y I) Gait All IMU 27 PD (H&Y:1-3), 27
HCSVM 94.5
PD–Parkinson ’s disease; HC –Healthy controls; UPDRS –Uniﬁed Parkinson ’s disease Rating Scale; H&Y –Hoen and Yahr scale; ANN –Artiﬁcial Neural Network;
EVOL - Evolutinary algorithms; ENS –Ensemble of di ﬀerent algorithms; kNN –k-Nearest Neighbours; NB –Naïve Bayes; SVM –Support Vector Machine; RF –
Random Forest; Ac –Accuracy; Se –Sensitivity; Sp –Speciﬁcity; IMU –Inertial Measurement Unit; EM tracking –Electromagnetic tracking; FtN –Finger to nose; FT –
Finger tapping; HOC –Hand opening/closing; HT –Heel tapping; SIT –Sitting; HA –Hand alternating; RT –Reaction time.M. Beli ć, et al. Clinical Neurology and Neurosurgery 184 (2019) 105442
5