The Nature of Clinical Depression:
Symptoms, Syndromes, and Behavior Analysis
Jonathan W. Kanter, Andrew M. Busch, Cristal E. Weeks, and
Sara J. Landes
University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee
In this article we discuss the traditional behavioral models of depressio n and some of the
challenges analyzing a phenomenon with such complex and varied features. We present the
traditional model and suggest that it does not capture the complexity of th e phenomenon, nor
do syndromal models of depression that dominate the mainstream conceptua lization of
depression. Instead, we emphasize ideographic analysis and present depr ession as a maladaptive
dysregulation of an ultimately adaptive elicited emotional response. We emphasize environ-
mental factors, specifically aversive control and private verbal events , in terms of relational
frame theory, that may transform an adaptive response into a maladaptive d isorder. We
consider the role of negative thought processes and rumination, common an d debilitating
aspects of depression that have traditionally been neglected by behavior analysts.
Key words: clinical depression, clinical behavior analysis
As the field of clinical behavior
analysis grows, it will benefit from
analyses of increasingly complex and
common clinical phenomena, espe-
cially those with significant public
health implications. One such phe-
nomenon is clinical depression, con-
sidered to be the ‘‘common cold’’ of
outpatient populations. Up to 25
million people in the United States
alone meet criteria for some type of
depressive disorder in a given year
(M. B. Keller, 1994). Depressive
disorders also result in considerable
financial expenditure including time
spent away from the workplace and
an increase in health care costs.
Based on broad measures that in-
clude work absenteeism, treatment
costs, and other factors, the annual
economic cost of depressive disorders
in the United States may be over $40
billion (Antonouccio, Thomas, &
Danton, 1997). Suicide is the ultimate
cost.
Perhaps nowhere in clinical psy-
chology is the medicalization ofbehavioral problems more complete
than with depression. Depression is
largely seen by the general public and
mainstream media as a neuropsychi-
atric illness (e.g., Wingert & Kantro-
witz, 2002) with a fluctuating course
that is best described in disease-state
terms such as disorder, episodes,
remission, recovery, relapse ,a n d re-
currence (Frank et al., 1991). An
additional assumption is that this
disorder may be diagnosed and la-
beled using the symptom checklists of
the standard diagnostic system, the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV-TR ;
American Psychiatric Association,
2000). The basic ontological assump-
tion is that depression is an illness
that occurs episodically and can be
described adequately in medical
terms. Thus, more depression is
treated in primary care than in any
other mental health or health care
setting (Kessler, McGonagle, Swartz,
Blazer, & Nelson, 2003; Shapiro,
1984), and guidelines for treatment
in these settings recommend antide-
pressant treatment without specialty
referral unless the patient has com-
plicating factors such as comorbid
substance use or suicide risk (Schul-
berg, Katon, Simon, & Rush, 1998).Correspondence concerning this article
should be addressed to Jonathan W. Kanter,
P.O. Box 413, Department of Psychology,
University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee, Milwau-
kee, Wisconsin 53211 (e-mail: jkanter@uwm.
edu).The Behavior Analyst 2008, 31, 1–21 No. 1 (Spring)
1Even in these cases, specialty referral
is first to psychiatry for medication
management, and only a small num-
ber of individuals diagnosed with
depression will be seen by a clinical
psychologist, much less a behavioral-
ly oriented practitioner.
A hallmark of behavior analysis
has been its condemnation of the
misappropriation of lay terms as
scientific, technical terms (e.g., Skin-
ner, 1945). The first task is precise
specification of the behavioral phe-
nomena invoked by the term. There
are several obstacles to achieving this
precision with the term depression,
which have been excellently presented
for the term anxiety by Friman,
Hayes, and Wilson (1998). The case
for depression is quite similar. First,
the term depression was never meant
as a technical term and actually has a
metaphorical, idiomatic basis. Sec-
ond, our psychiatric nomenclature
and mainstream usage of the term
suggest that depression is an empir-
ical phenomenon with an essential
composition. To a behavior analyst,
the term depression is not a technical
term, does not precisely map onto
any empirical or behavioral phenom-
ena, and has no essential composi-
tion. Thus, given the exhaustive
medicalization of the phenomenon
of depression, there exists an im-
mense gap between a behavioral
analysis of depression and main-
stream usage of it as a medical term
with its various associations and
meanings.
Behavior-analytic writings on clin-
ical depression (e.g., Dougher &
Hackbert, 1994, 2000; Ferster, 1973;
Lewinsohn, 1974; see Eifert, Beach,
& Wilson, 1998, for an alternative,
paradigmatic behavioral model) have
been illuminative but sparse. Al-
though research on depression has
outpaced research on virtually every
other disorder by psychiatric and
cognitive-behavioral researchers, be-
havior analysts have been alarmingly
silent. There are undoubtedly many
reasons for this silence (e.g., a lack oftraining programs that focus on
behavior analysis and traditional
psychopathology and more reinforce-
ment for studying familiar topics).
More relevant to the current paper is
the possibility that the exhaustive
medicalization of the term; the wealth
of non-behavior-analytic research da-
ta on biology and genetics, personal-
ity, and cognitive factors; and the
emphasis on private events in depres-
sion—on how depression feels and on
changing that feeling—may function
to evoke avoidance in behavior ana-
lysts.
This is unfortunate, because be-
havior analysis can not only provide
an integrative view of depression,
taking into consideration genetics,
biology, enduring patterns of re-
sponding labeled personality , verbal
(‘‘cognitive’’) behavior, and private
events, but it can do so with a
theoretical consistency and pragmatic
utility unmatched by other theoreti-
cal systems. In this paper we attempt
to start at the beginning, with a
discussion of what depression is to a
behavior analyst and how this con-
trasts with mainstream usage of the
term as a medical syndrome. We
review the traditional operant model
of depression that emphasized reduc-
tions in behavior as a response to
environmental events. We then tackle
several areas of inquiry important to
an understanding of depression that
have traditionally been neglected by
behavior analysts, including private
events and the role of verbal behavior
in depression. We see this not as
completing a behavioral analysis but
as a reminder of the importance of
idiographic, functional analyses of
specific individuals for this complex
phenomenon.
WHAT IS DEPRESSION?
TACTING DEPRESSION
AND ITS SYMPTOMS
We describe depression in radical
behavioral terms, emphasizing the
occasions on which the term is used2 JONATHAN W. KANTER et al.and deemphasizing any underlying
unitary disease, physiological, or
emotional state to which the term
refers. Depression comes from the late
Latin word depressare and the classi-
cal Latin word deprimere .Deprimere
literally means ‘‘press down’’; de
translates into ‘‘down’’ and premere
translates into ‘‘to press.’’ In essence,
the term appears to denote a feeling
of heaviness, of being ‘‘pressed
down,’’ that is also referred to as
‘‘sad,’’ ‘‘blue,’’ or simply ‘‘down.’’
Depression also refers to a depressed
topography or the fact of being
pressed down. Depression as a refer-
ent to mood or emotional state
appeared as early as 1665 and merely
meant a lowering of mood or spirits
(Simpson & Weiner, 1989). Thus, the
core experience of depression appears
to be a private event tacted as
depressed or in psychiatric terms as
dysphoric . However, a minority of
individuals will meet criteria for
depression and deny depressed mood
or present with irritable mood in-
stead. These individuals may have
deficits in accurate tacting of private
experience, or they may represent
diagnostic Type II errors and should
not be classified as depressed.
It is important not to associate
what is tacted as depression with a
specific pattern of physiological re-
sponding or reify it as a particular
emotional state. The antecedent con-
ditions and underlying physiologies
associated with the experience of
depression may vary widely, and no
core composition can be assumed.
Emotional states such as sadness are
simply co-occurring behavioral re-
sponses (elicited unconditioned re-
flexes, conditioned reflexes, operant
predispositions) that appear to be
integrated because the behaviors are
occasioned by common discrimi-
nanda and are controlled by common
consequences (Skinner, 1953). For
example, a child with overbearing
parents experiences an emotional
state of sadness and a co-occurring
behavioral response of crying whenher parents criticize her. The crying is
negatively reinforced when her par-
ents comfort her and stop criticizing
her, which may also result in a
change of her emotional state.
The particular quality of an emo-
tional state labeled depression should
vary with the characteristics of the
environmental triggers. For example,
private events labeled as depressed
may be associated with overworking
and receiving little reinforcement for
long stretches of time or with grieving
the death of a loved partner. In each
case the underlying physiology is
presumably different, but the experi-
enced phenomena may be sufficiently
similar to prompt the tact. More
specific discrimination training may
be useful (e.g., the first situation may
be better labeled as burned out and
the second as grieving ) but given the
problems associated with training the
tacting of private events (Moore,
1980) it is not clear that an individual
will be able to make these discrimi-
nations reliably.
The psychiatric nomenclature em-
phasizes this core experience and
several additional symptoms. De-
pressed mood or dysphoria is the
primary feature of major depressive
disorder (MDD), the most common
depressive diagnosis. In addition to
this core experience, there are several
other symptoms of MDD, including
loss of interest in activities, sleep and
appetite changes, guilt and hopeless-
ness, fatigue, restlessness, concentra-
tion problems, and suicidal ideation.
As discussed in detail below, the
medical model holds that this con-
stellation of symptoms represents a
syndrome, but complexity is immedi-
ately introduced because the presence
and nature of these symptoms vary
considerably across clients (Lı ´ndal &
Stefa´nsson, 1991). For example, some
clients experience vegetative symp-
toms of depression (decreased appe-
tite and insomnia) whereas, less
commonly, others experience re-
versed vegetative symptoms of in-
creased appetite and hypersomnia.THE NATURE OF CLINICAL DEPRESSION 3Similarly, psychomotor retardation is
more common and agitation is less
common, and both may be demon-
strated by the same individual at
different times.
To account for this complexity,
DSM-IV-TR has parsed depression
into various additional categories,
each with similar and overlapping
characteristics, and there are an
increasing number of diagnostic cat-
egories of depressive disorders or
problems involving sad or irritable
affect. In fact, Appendix B of DSM-
IV-TR lists 17 proposed disorders for
further study, six of which deal with
disorders of mood. Although detailed
review of these subcategories is out-
side the purview of this paper, it
should be noted that although there
may indeed be different syndromes
with different etiologies and treat-
ment implications, a behavior-analyt-
ic view holds that the current prolif-
eration of depressive disorders is
largely unnecessary. We see not
several distinct disorders but a phe-
nomenon of depression with great
variability in time course, symptom
severity, and correlated conditions.
All the disorders share a depressed
mood symptom that parallels the
core experience of the problem, and
all share several additional criteria
with MDD, often differing only in
duration or number of symptoms.
From an idiographic behavior-ana-
lytic perspective, there exists not one
or three or several depressive disor-
ders—there are as many depressive
disorders as there are depressed
individuals.
The constellation of depressive
disorders with shared characteristics
suggests that the tact depression
involves a variety of public and
private antecedent stimulating events
that vary from occasion to occasion
but have sufficient overlapping prop-
erties to occasion consistent usage of
the term. We view the diversity of
additional symptoms represented by
these disorders as consistent with the
diversity of environmental causes ofdepression, physiological states la-
beled depression , and psychological
responses to the environmental caus-
es and physiological states. Thus, no
overarching depressive syndromes
are posited or assumed at this point.
Nonetheless, commonalities in histo-
ry, environmental antecedents, and
symptom presentation exist and may
guide treatment decisions.
Thus, our understanding of depres-
sion must allow for the great variety
of stimulus conditions that occasion
use of the term. We can discard
several classes of use that we can
simply label as incorrect. For exam-
ple, an individual learning a foreign
language may simply state the wrong
word. Likewise, a person may be
diagnosed with depression but later it
is determined that the person has a
large cancerous tumor that is causing
the symptoms. Although a complete
behavioral analysis must account for
these usages, they are not interesting
from a clinical standpoint. More
important are instances in which the
term is not used but could be. For
example, a person visits a psycholo-
gist and complains of several symp-
toms of depression but not depressed
mood. Another person would label
the private experience as ‘‘de-
pressed,’’ but the current client did
not develop adequate private stimu-
lus control over the experience. The
psychologist performs a diagnostic
interview, and the client falls one
symptom short of the diagnosis of
MDD. In this case it is advantageous
to consider the person depressed even
though it is possible that neither the
psychologist nor the client will use
the term.
TRADITIONAL BEHAVIORAL
MODELS OF DEPRESSION
Skinner wrote very little on depres-
sion; when he did, he emphasized
overt behavior rather than the core
affective experience, in line with an
operant rather than respondent mod-
el. For example, in 1953 he wrote,4 JONATHAN W. KANTER et al.If we remove a man from his characteristic
surroundings, a large part of his social
behavior cannot be emitted and may therefore
become more and more probable: he will
return to his old surroundings whenever
possible and will be particularly ‘‘sociable’’
when he does so. Other parts of his behavior
become strong because they are automatically
reinforced under the prevailing deprivation; he
will talk to anyone who will listen about his
old surroundings, his old friends, and what he
used to do. This is all a result of deprivation.
But nostalgia is also an emotional condition in
which there is a general weakening of other
forms of behavior—a ‘‘depression,’’ which
may be quite profound. We cannot classify
this as the result of deprivation because the
behavior which is thus affected has not been
specifically restrained. (p. 165)
Three aspects of this passage are
noteworthy. First, as Skinner typical-
ly did, by placing the term depression
in quotes he was careful to avoid
giving it any special status other than
that of a verbal description. As
discussed above, this practice of
placing such terms in quotes may be
awkward and tiresome but serves as a
reminder that certain assumptions
are not to be made when using them.
The quotes also serve as a reminder
of an important verbal quality to the
term, discussed below. Second, Skin-
ner described the core experience as
an ‘‘emotional condition,’’ suggesting
an elicited component. Consistent
with an operant model, he did not
elaborate on this point and instead
focused on overt behavioral reduc-
tions. Third, Skinner highlighted the
centrality of reduced positive rein-
forcement in depression. Simply put,
social behavior depends on a rein-
forcing environment; change the en-
vironment so that responses do not
yield reinforcement and one reduces
the behavior.
This notion became the foundation
of Lewinsohn’s (1974) theory and
dominated the behavioral literature
for several decades. Lewinsohn de-
scribed depression as characterized
primarily by a low rate of response-
contingent positive reinforcement
(RCPR). In a nutshell, Lewinsohn
emphasized environmental events thatproduce losses of major sources of
RCPR, such as a divorce or the loss of
a job, and social skills deficits that
limit an individual’s ability to reob-
tain RCPR once it has been lost.
Thus, his model focused on the
behavioral reductions often seen in
depression. Lewinsohn assumed the
core experience to be an elicited by-
product of these situations, but he did
not detail this process. Other symp-
toms of depression (e.g., fatigue, so-
matic symptoms, and cognitive symp-
toms) were assumed to be evoked or
to be secondary elaborations of other
symptoms.
We hold that Lewinsohn’s (1974)
characterization of the core affective
experience of depression as an elicited
by-product of losses of or reductions
in positive reinforcement is funda-
mental to understanding depression.
Some cases of depression clearly are
described best by Lewinsohn’s model,
such as single, discrete episodes of
depression with clear environmental
precipitants and with symptom pro-
files that emphasize behavioral re-
ductions that resolve when the envi-
ronments are reinstated. For exam-
ple, a person may become depressed
after a divorce or loss of job, and the
depression resolves when the person
finds a new relationship partner or
a new job. With cases of chronic
depression, Lewinsohn’s model em-
phasizes persistently insufficient lev-
els of reinforcement and social skills
deficits that prevent the individual
from changing the situation, and this
model also seems to be adequate for
some cases. For example, a person
who becomes depressed after a di-
vorce, resulting in a net reduction in
positive reinforcement, and does not
have adequate social skills for initi-
ating new romantic relationships will
likely become chronically depressed
until the necessary social skills are
learned.
All of this is nothing new. Howev-
er, Lewinsohn’s (1974) model vastly
underestimated the variety and com-
plexity of factors that can reduceTHE NATURE OF CLINICAL DEPRESSION 5